[music]
Mhm.
I call the meeting to order.
This is the School Committee (the elected
board that runs the public schools) meeting on June 18th, 2026.
It's an exciting night. Many people are
here.
Welcome, everyone.
We are honoring people tonight.
First, I want to honor Betsy Fitzpatrick.
I have only been doing this for a year,
but I am amazed at how well everything
gets done.
I got the name tag and you got the name
tags.
It's just brilliant. So, Betsy,
we would not be where we are without you.
We could not do things so easily if it
wasn't for Betsy Fitzpatrick. Thank you.
[applause]
OKAY.
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US FOR THIS ANNUAL
celebration of staff who have worked
over thirty years for the public schools
of Brookline
and for our students.
We know our educators are wonderful,
but tonight we get to show the wider
community some of our staff.
Each honoree will speak for a few minutes
to share their talent,
commitment, dedication, and
professionalism.
Our staff bring these qualities to the
Brookline Public Schools every day.
I often learn at conferences that
Brookline is a beacon.
Brookline is a lighthouse for educational
excellence in
Massachusetts and around the nation.
that our staff bring to the Brookline
Public Schools and to their jobs every
day. Brookline as we I always find out
when I
go to conferences all over the place that
Brookline is a beacon.
Brookline is the lighthouse for
educational excellent excellence in
Massachusetts and really throughout the
nation.
A good reputation is built over time.
It comes from our staff's hard work. They
are truly
the center of what we do from early
education to 12th grade. We are very
thankful to each person
who makes the Brookline Public Schools
what they are.
We asked our honorees to think of one
story, one connection,
one important part, or one memory to
share.
These should show the work
they have done. We look forward to hearing
from 15 educators tonight,
right, Betsy? 15.
All of our staff have made a lasting
impact on our school system.
We have two staff members here tonight who
will not be
speaking. I want to say a few words about
them. First, Fran McGrail.
Fran is the long-time custodian at Runkle.
He has worked at other schools, including
the high school, while I was
there. He is truly the heart and soul of
Runkle. He is important to the school's
operation. He treats students, staff, and
parents with great respect and
kindness. Absolutely. His patience and
understanding
are clear in how he cares for Runkle
students in the RISE program.
His steady presence at the school is
amazing. Principal Finnegan calls
Fran a treasure, which he is. I know there
is a
retirement celebration for Runkle staff
tonight, so I don't think
Fran can stay, but I want to thank him
now. Fran
McGrail, please stand up so we can show
our appreciation.
[applause]
Thank you, Fran. Now, Elizabeth
Hendrickson. Oh my, Elizabeth,
we go way back. Elizabeth's colleagues,
including me, say she is one of the
hardest workers in the Brookline Public
Schools. She started as a
METCO liaison and earned her Bachelor of
Science in Nursing while
doing that. Excuse me.
Now, she is a valued member of the school
nursing team. She
has worked during our extended school year
and helped with homework centers.
She is a district-wide nurse, and with her
strong
clinical skills and calmness,
especially under pressure, she is just
perfect.
worked for our extended school year,
helped with homework centers. She's a
district-wide nurse, and with her strong
clinical school skills and calmness,
yeah, under pressure, that's nursing, she
is the perfect she's just perfect
for the job. I want us to recognize
Elizabeth Hendrickson.
[applause and cheering]
Thank you. It is a busy time of year, and
sadly, eight honorees could not join us tonight.
Betty Differ,
Pam Carlson, Rob Hutcheson, Jan Nixon
Mathis, I need water.
[clears throat] Joanne Silver Njoku, did I
say Joanne Sweeney? Yes. Akiki Kawai Marbet, and Shoshana Kastan.
They can't be here, but they are great
people and great teachers, and they help a lot. Thank you.
Now, it is time for inspiration, emotion,
and some comedy.
We will call the honorees tonight one at a
time, in order by last name.
Susan Balogh is first.
[applause] So, speak into this so people
at home can hear you.
Okay, speak into this. I have to tell a
story about Betsy.
At Baker School, when people ask, "Who
should we send this to? Who will understand where this is?",
the answer is always, "Email Betsy
Fitzpatrick. She will know." And she does.
Good evening, everyone, and thank you to
the School Committee for inviting me.
My dear friend Diane Arecco Mondol, who is
a teacher in Lawrence, is here to support me.
My beloved son Noah, my first child, who
taught me humility and patience because parenting is really just teaching without a paycheck.
It is great to be here, and it is an honor
to be here. I will talk about love tonight.
I started doing something different in my
teaching this year.
People always ask, "How can you teach for
so long?"
I say, "Because every kid is different,
and every year is different, and that keeps it lively and wonderful."
This year, I began signing my Canvas
messages to the kids with,
“Please remember, you missed this
assignment. I know you were out sick with strep throat, but that was last week. Let me help you finish this.
It was great to have you back in class.
Love, Ms. Balogh."
I thought really long and hard about the
love part.
But I do love my students very much, and I
remember my 10th-grade teacher, my
it is great to be here, and it's an honor
to be here. I'm going to talk
about love tonight.
I started doing something different in
my teaching this year. You know, people
always say, "How can you teach so long?"
And I say, "Because every kid is
different, and every year is different,
and that's what keeps it lively and
wonderful.
Um but this year I started signing off on
my Canvas messages to the kids with, you
know, "Please you missed this
assignment. I know you were out sick with
strep throat, but that was last
week. Let me help you get this done. Um it
was great to have you back in class.
Love, Ms. Balogh." And I thought really
long and hard about the love part.
But I do love my students very much, and
um I remember my 10th grade teacher, my
English teacher, Patsy Root. She was
from East Texas, and I am going to
try to channel Mrs. Root. She would say,
"The Greeks have it all on us. I'm an
English teacher, but the Greeks have it
better. They have six words for love. We
love
McDonald's french fries. We love our
grandmother. It's all the same. It
doesn't make sense. So, she would teach us
about the different forms of love.
And the kind of love that
we show as humans to
other humans is agape. Agape is
the kind of love that is selfless giving.
Maybe in Buddhism, you might know
it as loving kindness. That is a good
translation, I think.
Of course, we love our students. I love my
students and I want the best for them.
And in Greek, we are all in loco parentis.
We are in the place of parents. I want
every child to be cherished in my
care just like they are cherished at home
with their parents. So,
I was thinking about love and the love
I have for my kids and as a teacher, I
have the great honor of sharing
my life and growing that loving kindness
in
many hundreds, maybe thousands of
very open-hearted Brookline youngsters
and their families.
And in return, they help me
to become my best self.
They give me joy and challenge every day,
every year
that is really special.
It is a privilege and an honor
even though it can be tiring and draining
and sometimes I
wake up in the middle of the night
worrying about them.
And I try to think about what could I do
differently? I think
that's my phone ringing. We are going to
just ignore it.
That is me, Nicole. We will think that's
spam.
That is so sweet. Who was Miss She
loved Miss Brandl's class.
My students have taught me love,
too. They have taught me patience and
humility and definitely love. I care for
each kid.
Um, I don't always get it right every day,
but I am very thankful I have 180 days
with them because, in teaching,
you can try again. Sometimes, the kids
have this special way
of finding you or they come to see you
in the hallways after school, and they
connect with you.
Um, and it’s wonderful. I got
a message on Instagram from a kid named
Nicole. This was during
COVID. She said to me, "Miss Bellow,
you have no idea how much it means to me
that you stay in touch. I feel I learned
to use my voice
to help fight for what's right from you."
I remember in seventh grade when you had
us all sit down in class
and talked about the killing of black men.
I hadn't been talking about that because I
didn't know it was a
problem, but you made me and all my
classmates see it. I
started to realize that having tough,
honest talks is important
and that they can lead to change.
So I'm not ready to stop working. I still
have
a lot of energy left, but I want to
thank Nicole and every student and every
family I've ever had because
they believe, like I do, that they can
change the world. Thank you very much,
Susan.
[applause] By the way, there are five
seats in the front row. They are not
expensive.
Anyone who wants to sit in the front row
is welcome. Also, I
forgot to say that Val Freidus is joining
us online tonight because she couldn't be here.
And Jesse Hefter is on his way here from
New York City. He will arrive around
7:00. They both said they are
sad to not be here right now.
Okay, Nicole Brandel.
[applause]
It's much easier when your second graders
are in
Um, yes, good evening. Thank you to the
sadness not being here right now.
Okay, Nicole Brandel.
[applause]
It's so much easier when your second
graders are in
Um yes, good evening. Thank you to the
School Committee (the elected board that
runs the public schools) um for having this for
all of us who have put 30 years in. And
like Susan, I feel like we still have
some more to go. Um but I am Nicole
Brandel and I have
taught at Baker School for um 30 years in
second grade.
And I know, right? And I did have Gigi,
her daughter, so
um and I'll let you in on a secret that
second graders are absolutely the best.
Um they're positive about school. They
love coming to school. They love their
teacher um and they love to learn. So,
they make my job really easy.
Um it's hard to believe that 30 years has
already gone by.
Baker School is literally my home away
from home.
Um even though that sounds like a cliché,
it really is. However, my
husband and my children, thank you so
much for being here, will argue that I
spend more time at Baker than I do at home.
[clears throat] So, um the life of an
elementary school
teacher. So, um thank you so much to my
wonderful family for putting up with me
because having a teacher in the house is
not always the easiest thing.
Um so, I appreciate it. Um you could say
that Brookline is in our family. Um my
husband is the night senior at the high
school and our three children, Madison,
Morgan, and Tyler, are proud graduates
of Baker School and BHS.
Um thanks to the materials fee program,
the best program ever. Just woohoo!
Um Brookline is a part of all of us and
we are so fortunate for that, my whole
family. When Betsy reached out about
this event, I started thinking about how
many students I have taught over the
years. So, being a second grade teacher,
I actually counted all of my class
pictures because they're displayed in my
classroom cuz I love being reminded of all
of them and it came out to 613, but
let's be honest, there were people who
weren't there on picture day and we
always get an influx of so many new
students over the course of the year.
So, we know that it's north of that
number.
Um, but I consider myself lucky that I
have been able to support and teach and
help so many students grow. There have
been many wonderful families over the
years and I love hearing about where
students are now, what their adventures
are, what they're doing and I feel proud
that I was part of their journey.
Um, well, believe it or not, my luck
doesn't stop there. Um, I work with some
of my best friends and that is not
something that many people can say. Um,
and so, my best friends are also here.
Um, I am very lucky to have many great
coworkers at Baker and that
some of those friendships have grown into
more. Friends
that are there for you for all the good
things in life and also the hard
times. I have Brookline, especially Baker,
to thank for bringing all these
wonderful people into my life.
My current second grade team, we like to
call ourselves the grade two gals, GTG,
anytime you see us, we sign it that way
because that's who we are. We've been
together for 12 years, the four of us, and
I feel very lucky that we've had
that and we can help our second graders
grow.
After 30 years, I can still say that I
love my job
even though at times it feels impossible.
Um, after school on Tuesday, I sat down at
my desk, which by the way is a tool
in an elementary school classroom. We
actually never sit at our desks except
for maybe after school, and there was
this little note on my desk, and it had a
big heart. I opened up the letter
and it said, "Dear Ms. Brandl, I like how
you always make me feel good." And I
said, "That's why I've been doing this for
years. If I can just help kids feel good
and grow and become wonderful people,
then I've done my job." Thank you so much.
Thank you, Nicole. I'm [clears throat] a
little
disappointed that I do not see a drum
set for the next speaker, but I guess he
forgot to bring it. Carolyn Castellano.
Hey, thank you so much. Thank you,
Brookline. Um
Bob, I remember sitting in your office
when I got hired, and we talked about
Rage Against the Machine.
I don't know if you remember that. The
microphone explodes, breaking the
pattern. I think you were rapping it, not
me.
Anyway, it's been great. Um I'm not going
to talk too long because I talked um
recently here about my journey at
Brookline, which has been an amazing
time here. I think I just want to think
about the connections we make
with students and especially being here
for so long. I remember my very first
student, Samdorf, whom I'm still in touch
with today. Um or just recently, another
student, um I was asked to go to one of
the um Celtics playoff
games. A friend of mine was playing
trumpet at it and um I I couldn't go
last minute, and he said, "Well, do you
know someone else who wants to go to the
game?" I thought of a student.
I contacted him and asked, "Do you want to
go to the Celtics game tonight?"
He said, "Yes." They went to the game.
They watched warm-ups and met some
players.
Not Reggie Lewis. I think it was someone
else. Anyway,
those connections are what I will always
remember.
I connect with the students.
It feels good to know I made a difference.
They see me, and I see them, like a
mirror.
We keep that connection even when they
leave.
It's awesome.
The best part of my job is the connections
with the students.
That's all I want to say. Thank you.
I’m sorry, I don’t have drums. I will
bring them next time.
Thank you, Carolyn. Next is Deborah
Caruso.
Props are great.
Hello. Thank you, everyone. Thank you,
School Committee (the elected board that runs the public schools) for this honor.
I am one of the 31s.
I started here in 1995 and know many faces
in this room.
I am not a teacher. I am an occupational
therapist.
I help those quiet voices that don't
always get heard. I promised not to cry.
I have a parent on the School Committee
whose son graduated this year with my child.
I feel like my two boys graduated
together.
All the kids I work with are my kids.
I was asked to share a special moment.
I brought my first Brookline Special
Education Parent Advisory Council (SEPAC) Hero Award.
I earned it in 2019, and it was the
highlight of my career.
Since I started, I got my master's in
autism care and my doctorate in autism and trauma-informed practice.
But nothing can top this award because it
came from the parents.
My job is to advocate for those who need
help.
brought in my very first Brookline SEPAC
Hero Award which I earned in 2019 and
this was the highlight of my career.
Um I've uh since I started here, I got
my master's in autism care, I got my
doctor's degree in autism and
trauma-informed practice, but nothing
can top this award because this came
from the parents. And at the end of the
day, my job is to advocate for those who
Some kids can't always speak up for
themselves.
Those kids are sometimes called not always
our kids,
but your kids.
At the end of the day, this is why I am
here.
Everyone asks me after my master's degree,
"Will you keep working?"
Yes, I will keep working.
After my doctorate, "Will you keep
working?"
Yes, I will keep working.
"Don't you want to be a manager?"
No, I don't want to be a manager.
The kids are my reason for being here.
I have been working for 31 years,
but I feel like I have 15 more years to
give.
When I walk through the playground
and hear 40 or 50 children call me Dr.
Caruso and come to hug me,
that is why I am here.
Thank you for letting me help raise so
many of your children,
to help them feel like they belong,
to help them feel part of our community,
no matter what the outside world says.
All my kids on Individualized Education
Plans (IEPs)
and all my kids with special needs are my
kids.
They are all our kids.
Thank you for letting me share this with
you.
I will say my son just graduated,
along with Donna's son.
I won’t say any names, I promise.
But I also wanted my son to be in the
public schools of Brookline.
So, we are a Brookline family.
I have spent my whole adult life working
for this community,
and my son is now part of this community.
Thank you for the privilege of being a
part of all of you.
Yeah. [applause]
Thank you, Deborah.
Elizabeth Gorman.
[applause]
Liz Gorman.
All right.
I have the microphone.
Thank you to my family,
One surprise is that it has not gotten
easier.
[laughter]
I have more skills, but I still work
long hours. I never feel caught up. My
husband can confirm.
Sadly, I still feel dread
on Sunday nights and after vacations.
We are on every day, all day.
I wish for a job that I don't
bring home every day and every weekend.
But the stress goes away every
Monday morning when I am in my classroom
with students.
It's a happy place for me and seems to be
for many of you.
Another surprise is that it is just
as fun and exciting as it was 30
years ago. That is a good surprise.
I am not a teacher known for a single
great
achievement, but I am proud of a few
things I helped create.
I helped create a China exchange, the
climbing wall,
a network of mindfulness work with
teachers, and many Spanish curriculum
units. My teaching, like most teachers,
which to clarify is not
over, [laughter]
has been defined by a lot of effort
and made of many small moments of joy and
kindness.
It is not a thankless job.
In addition to the daily delights, every
year around this time
the thank you cards come in. I keep a
folder
labeled nice. [laughter]
The special ones are making it nice and
full. This note
that I will share is from a student. This
note
came unexpectedly in October of this year
and
shows what I am most proud of.
I will change the name for privacy. The
email said,
"Hi Ms.
Gorman. I'm Emma and I had you for my
junior year Spanish class about 4 years
ago. I just wanted to reach out and say
thank you. During my junior year of high
school, I struggled with my mental health
and you honestly saved my life.
You asked me to stay after class one day
and wanted to know why I was missing so many classes.
It didn’t feel like a confrontation. It
felt like you cared.
We started to talk regularly.
Having one person care about me then was
what I needed to stay alive.
Now I am a junior in college in
Philadelphia. I am studying to be an elementary school teacher.
[laughter] If I become half the teacher
and person you are, I will feel successful.
Thank you so much for helping me,
especially when I needed it the most.
I hope this email reaches you and I hope
you have a great school year.
Best, Emma. Every teacher makes a
difference, and we often don’t know when.
Please trust the School Committee (the
elected board that runs the public schools).
Please keep trusting and supporting
teachers to follow their passions.
Help create good conditions so they can
show up healthy for others.
Please keep our class sizes small.
[laughter] This way we can know every
person in our rooms.
I am so excited that Emma will soon be a
future teacher.
Thank you and congratulations to you all.
[applause] Thank you, Liz. Michelle
Greeley.
[applause] Thank you very much, School
Committee (the elected board that runs the public schools).
This is such an honor. It is also an honor
but a little scary to realize my gray hairs are coming in faster.
As a BEEP (the Boston Early Education
Program) teacher, I’ve taught at FRR (the Frederick School),
the Lynch Center, Driscoll, Lincoln, and
now I teach pre-K at BEEP (the Boston Early Education Program) at Putterham.
My classroom, no matter where it is, feels
like my home away from home.
I would like to take you all on a field
trip there right now.
For this trip, please humor me and close
your eyes when I count to three.
With your eyes closed, you can imagine all
the sights.
You will hear four and five-year-olds
describe the map that takes you to PKG.
1 2 3.
Now, close your eyes and imagine, for this
is BEEP (the Boston Early Education Program) at Putterham.
First, you ring the buzzer.
is my home away from home.
I'd like to take you all on a field trip
there right now.
Now, for this trip, I'd like to you to all
humor me and close your eyes once I
count to three. With your eyes shut,
you'll be able to
envision all the sights as you listen to
four and five-year-olds describe the map
that leads to PKG.
1 2 3.
Now, close your eyes and imagine, for
this is BEEP at Putterham.
First, you ring the buzzer.
Then, you push one of the two doors. On
the other side is the door to the
playground. There are many windows there.
The stairs are in the middle.
Follow the arrows up the stairs. We are
going straight to near where the
elevator is. Do not use that elevator if
there is a
fire. This is the glass door to go inside.
Now, I want to thank my dad for that fire
safety tip because he worked for
many years as a firefighter in Newton and
shared great fire safety tips with
all of my students.
Now, here you are. This is a picture of
all the friends at school. There are
all the teachers. All up on the side is
a long hallway. The letters right
here means it's the classroom.
Abracadabra, everyone open your eyes.
We are here. You have just arrived in a
corner of a
BEEP classroom where true learning
happens.
The magic happens as the students here
learn from each other.
The joy happens as they celebrate and
praise each other.
Now, I would like you to listen to their
joy. These are their words.
I love your book so much and it's funny.
And thank you very much for making it.
It's so cute and I love it so much. I
love your story.
It is like a wow maze. I love your
pictures that you made. I love that you
can read. I love the letters that you
can form. I really like your drawing. I
love how
well you are reading. You are just doing
so great.
In BEEP, we never underestimate the
power of a word or a gesture.
The words that we choose help others to
feel loved, special, appreciated,
valued, and respected.
Just as important as our words are
the gestures of those who cannot
speak. Positive gestures, handshakes,
movements, whispers, and eye contact
carry the same meaning as our words.
Some of my best times in BEEP were
dancing with a nonverbal learner.
Her smiles and laughter were like sweet
treats.
That is really true.
I came to Brookline because the schools
care about different people.
They celebrate our differences.
I have been all around Brookline.
I know that Brookline is a place for
everyone.
It is a place where we all feel valued
together.
Thank you to everyone in Brookline.
A special thanks to Margaret, our
principal, Rachel, Aaron, and all the helpers and coworkers I have worked with.
I also want to thank my dad.
He taught me to love maps.
Dad, you have always guided me.
Thank you for always being there.
My dad was a firefighter in Newton for 40
years.
I plan to be here for a longer time.
To my mom who showed me how to inspire
kids with fun projects.
As a preschool teacher, she taught me to
be patient and caring.
Thank you to my daughters, Joella and
Julia.
They share their mom, me, day and night
with my students and their families.
They help me in many ways.
Thank you. Thank you.
[applause]
Thank you, Michelle. Lisa Lamont Harris.
[applause and cheering]
Okay. How do you tell 30 years in 3
minutes?
I will use a few short points.
I am a teacher at heart, so there is a
lesson here.
Here we go.
Lessons I learned from 30 years in the
public schools of Brookline.
Lesson number one: Follow your heart.
Do not be afraid to take a chance on love.
Give up your secure job as a teacher in
Connecticut.
Leave what is familiar.
Leave your family and friends.
Follow that special person to a new and
exciting city.
It might just turn out well. Thank you,
Jason. I love you.
Number two,
Um number two,
When your job interview starts, Bob,
you'll
know right away, it begins with a
surprise juggling act by the principal,
okay? Do not worry.
Just think about the idea.
There is a lot to handle as a teacher. We
keep many things
up in the air, and some days feel like a
circus.
And when he offers you the job, you
say yes. Thank you, Tom Cavanagh.
I started at Baker, [applause] spent some
time here at Town Hall, and
I'm happily at Beebe now. Thank
you, Margaret.
Number three, learn from others.
Wise words from Alyssa Henry.
Half of teaching is acting.
Have fun and put on a show for your
students every day.
All right. Lesson number four, this is a
very
specific one.
If you are pregnant and go into labor
at school, okay?
Just call Trisha LaHam. [cheering]
Right?
Luckily, the baby came late, and I'm
just going to say Cole, who was supposed
to be here to help me tonight, uh
[laughter] late again.
All right. Oh, and the same goes for if
there's a pandemic, just call Trisha.
Number five,
do what is right, not what is easy.
Thank you to Vicky Milstein for my daily
reminder of that.
Fairness and inclusion take ongoing
hard work.
It is better for everyone
and it is necessary work.
Please support programs like Scholars
and Seed, METCO, and materials fee
and Steps to Success.
All right? And
Lastly, while taking care of children,
take care of each other.
I will try not to get emotional now.
Teaching is a deeply personal job.
Colleagues become friends.
I look around this room and I see many
friends.
We've shared in weddings and births.
We've helped each other through hard times
and loss.
And maybe most importantly, we have
found laughter and joy in this wonderful
job of teaching.
For this, I am thankful. Thank you.
[Applause]
Thank you, Lisa. Paul Larreau Priestley.
Hello everyone. I'm Paul Larreau
Priestley. I run the
Graphic Arts Copy Center at Brookline
High School.
I have been there for 31 years.
That's a long time, but I still have more
to give.
As I thought about what to say this
evening,
I considered how to use
this time well.
Should I talk about fighting
the systemic racism in our schools
and the larger community around us?
Or should I talk about how we have
worked to improve
racial diversity in our classrooms,
among our staff, and in our
administration?
Then I thought, "What about
financial equity?
Financial equity is also important. But
then guess what? I said, 'No.'"
I said, "Love."
Love. Love is powerful.
Love helps people heal.
Love supports each other.
We give love to every student
through the power of knowledge.
We help and support each other in many
ways.
This gives us all the help we need.
And that is a very nice thing.
I think of all of you as my friends.
In these times,
people need
nothing more than love.
My last words might make
some of you feel uneasy.
But I want you all
to know that I truly
care for each one of you.
In our world,
people can share hate
and negativity with strangers.
But I choose to share love.
Remember this: lead with love, because
love will win in the end.
[applause]
Thank you, Paul. Susan Lipman.
Thank you for having us here tonight.
I am very proud to be here with this
group of friends, which includes my
children's teachers, my children's
classmates' parents, and also
some people I went to Brookline High with.
Not many can say they had the same job for
31 years, and
33 years if you count my year as a
substitute teacher and special education assistant
before that.
Even fewer people can say they
really enjoy going to work every day.
Pierce School has been a big part
of my life since I was 6 years old.
I went to the new Pierce School as
a first grader in 1975.
I went to school there for all of
elementary.
I made some of my best
friends during those years.
My mother later taught Chapter 1, also
called Title 1; they kept changing the name.
My mother later taught Chapter 1 or Title
1, they kept kind of changing the
I started at Pierce School after I could
no longer teach at St.
Mary's School where I taught for many
years.
Later, my kids and stepkids also went to
Pierce.
My journey in Brookline started in 1993
when Barbara Shay hired me
as a substitute teacher at Lincoln School.
Barbara was amazing.
At that time, I was working on my master's
degree.
My first year was at the old Lincoln
School. Now I am back there as a teacher at Pierce School.
The next year we moved to the new Lincoln
School, but it was also called the old school.
I moved with them and worked in the
learning center while I got my master's.
The following year Chris Field, who was my
third-grade teacher, hired me as a second- grade teacher at Pierce School.
That felt like another full circle moment.
Over the past 31 years, I have learned
from great teachers and now I teach amazing educators.
When I started at Pierce, I worked with
teachers who had taught me.
They greatly influenced who I am today as
a person and a teacher.
Marie Lavelle, who I miss very much, was
like a mom to me.
She supported me from the beginning, and
now I try to be like her for my students and fellow teachers.
Pierce is more than just a job. It is my
community. It holds my childhood memories and is where my children thrived.
This year, I have a student in my second-
grade class whose aunt was in my first class at Pierce.
Her mother was in class with my stepson
and also Suzanne's son.
Being a teacher, a mom, and an...
alongside colleagues who had been my
teachers when I went there.
They all had such a huge impact on the
person and the teacher that I am today.
Marie Lavelle who I miss so greatly
every day was my work mom. She took me
under her wing from day one and now as
someone who's been at Pierce
for a long time I really try and emulate
her guidance,
her patience and her love to all the
teachers and the children.
Pierce is more than a job for me. It's my
community. The place that holds my
childhood memories and the place where my
own children thrived.
This year I have a child in my second
grade class whose mother was in my first
class I'm sorry, whose aunt was in my
first class at Pierce and whose mother
was in class with my stepson and also a
Suzanne's too. Um
Um being a being a teacher, a mom, an
A person who went to school here and lives
in Brookline has made it to this point.
I have done many jobs over the years.
But I would not change anything at all.
I enjoy every moment of it.
I love walking down the street.
I get hugs from people who are 30 years
old.
And also from kids who are seven years
I love seeing a Brookline police officer.
Then I remember that police officer was in
my second grade class.
I still love being a part of the school I
entered as a first grader long ago.
I want to say well done to everyone for
these 30 or 31 years.
Not every day is easy, especially at this
time of the year.
We are all trying to get through to the
end,
but for those of us who have been here a
long time,
we know how special the community of
Brookline is.
So, thank you very much for having us all.
[applause]
Thank you, Susan. Now, Stephanie Poon.
Thank you for this wonderful event.
It is a joy to listen to all of you.
I have been thinking about two things
before tonight.
What has helped me for 30 years? That is a
long time.
And what have I noticed about changes and
things that have stayed the same since I started at Brookline High School in the 1990s?
Here is what I found out.
The things that have made this job
possible and sometimes even enjoyable are the people around me at Brookline High School.
These are my students, which are my first
priority.
Even when they ask me questions about
things I just said, They truly keep me going.
They are very curious, frustrating, funny,
smart, hardworking,
and they always make me think about how I
can do my job better.
This time of year makes me really believe
that next year,
I will figure out how to do this job well
and fix all the education problems.
students first and foremost, um who,
though they might ask me a question
about something I have literally just
said, are truly the reason I keep going.
They are endlessly curious, maddening,
silly, smart, hard working, and constantly
make me think about how I can
do my job better. This is the time of year
when I really
lean into the thought that next year, I
will in fact figure out how to do this
job and solve all the problems of
education.
The other people around me at Brookline
High that make this possible are my
friends. I love them.
If I didn't have such smart, caring people
around me, I would go
crazy and quit. The other thing that has
made this
30-year journey possible is all the things
I've been able to do.
I've helped new teachers at Brookline for
years through the Teachers Mentoring
Teachers program. When a group of my
experienced colleagues
talked for the 15th time about how broken
ninth grade history was, and how unhappy we were with the unfair
student grouping that led to 70% of our
students taking honors, we, along with
the Office of Teaching and Learning, the
Superintendent, and the School Committee (the elected board that runs the public schools),
created WISP. When another group of
colleagues
talked about the senioritis that affects
our second semester seniors,
and how their only interest in school
seemed to be their
grades instead of their learning, we
created a hands-on senior class
called EPIC. Giving teachers chances to
use our
lots of experience and training to create
new things and solve problems keeps us
going.
I was also supported because I got to see
my own children go through
Brookline schools, and there is nothing so
grounding as seeing your child benefit from your colleagues' hard work,
to feel the love and care given to them,
and know that you can never really pay it back, only
forward. The materials fee program that
allowed
my husband and I to send our children,
one of whom is right back there,
through the Public Schools of Brookline
(PSB) gave me a stronger sense of commitment to this place. As my
husband Brian Lee recently said, it
literally meant that I had a personal stake in
the school. Do I want to make my school
the best it can be, to devote myself to my
students the way that my colleagues did
for my two children?
Absolutely. So, the second thing that I've
been
thinking about is what has changed and
what has stayed the same.
And really the first two points from
earlier about the students and the colleagues,
those haven't changed. I mean, they
literally have changed. They're
different people. But the spirit, the
energy, the
inspiration, and the fun, that's pretty
similar.
Lots of things have changed, of course.
When I started, I had binders filled with
lesson plans, and I wrote on a chalkboard.
I spent a lot of time just
trying to learn all the things I needed
to teach, acting and teaching.
The students were themselves,
but less worried.
It seemed like teachers got more respect.
The things that help me are not hard or
strange.
They are the things that help all of us.
Important work with nice people,
new challenges that are interesting,
fun, laughter, and sometimes happiness,
and summer vacation. [applause]
Thank you, Steph. Now, is this Malia or
Malia?
Malia. Malia Scott. Thank you.
[applause]
At our last math specialist meeting, we
talked about
turning our careers in Brookline
into years, days, hours, and minutes,
because we have fun with math like that.
So,
please allow me to share.
Thirty-two years ago, when I started my
master's program and full-year training at
the Lincoln School,
I didn't know what the materials fee
program was,
or how much it would change my family's
life.
A week and a half ago, I got up on stage
and graduated my youngest from
Brookline High. I feel very thankful for
the wonderful
education my children got here in
Brookline.
Even though my three children, one of whom
is over there,
are very different learners,
they all did well, were challenged, and
had great teachers that
helped them reach their potential.
I am very grateful that the materials fee
program made this all possible,
as it not only helped my family, but also
let me dedicate my
work life to the Brookline community.
5,856 school days ago,
I could never have imagined I would spend
most of my work life as
a math specialist, since books and reading
have always been my lifelong
interest. However, during my early time in
Brookline, I was lucky to work with such
skilled and gifted
Brookline, I had the privilege of
partnering with such skilled and gifted
math teachers like Rose Christiansen,
Nancy Buel, and Hillary Pastor.
They helped me change how I see myself as
a math teacher.
They encouraged me to keep learning and
improving my teaching.
Most importantly, they showed me the true
joy of teaching math.
They taught me that every student can
learn math.
My job as a math specialist focuses on
working with others.
I feel very lucky to work with teachers
who love to learn.
They help, challenge, and inspire me to
grow.
It has been a real privilege to work with
such smart teachers.
We find creative ways to make math
exciting.
They encourage me to try new things and
push my limits.
I am very proud of what we have achieved
together over the years.
38,064 school hours ago, I did not see how
important a supportive school leader was.
Today, I am very thankful to have worked
with great principals
like Barbara Shay, Andrew Bott, and now
Brian Dinitzio.
They have shown great trust in me.
By supporting my math projects at Lincoln,
they have given me the time and space to
be creative, try new ideas, and grow as a math teacher.
And finally, 2,283,840 school minutes ago,
I could not have imagined that the joy I
felt when I first worked with students would still be
central to my teaching today.
I love being a teacher.
I enjoy breaking the "I am bad at math"
mindset and feel happy knowing
each student is unique with their own
strengths and challenges.
In education, there is no one right way
for everyone.
To help our most needy students, I must
always learn and improve.
I look forward to those hard-fought
moments
when a tough idea finally makes sense
and the boost of confidence when
students start to see themselves as good
problem solvers.
challenges. In education, there is never
a one-size-fits-all approach. To meet the
needs of our most vulnerable
students, I must constantly grow, reflect,
and learn.
I live for those hard-fought aha moments
when a complex concept finally clicks
and the sudden surge of confidence when
students begin to recognize themselves
as capable problem solvers.
I feel very lucky to still be a teacher in
Brookline.
30,400.
Seconds later. Thank you.
[applause]
Thank you, Malia. I want to remind people
who are still standing that there
are three seats here and more seats over
there on my left. So,
why don't you sit down?
We will be here a little longer.
Okay, next up is Yasmin Shariff.
[applause]
All right.
Lisa needs to put her glasses on. I have
to take mine off because that’s what’s happening. Um before I start, I want to thank the
School Committee (the elected board that
runs the public schools) for this. This is great and thank all of you for being here.
I want to thank my husband who often says,
"I don’t know why this takes you so long. You have been teaching for so many years." But as all the
teachers in the room know, no matter how
long you’ve been teaching, the time
does not get less. It just keeps
on going. Um I also want to thank the
many parents here whose kids I taught
thanks to the materials fee
program we heard about tonight. That made
me a part of this
community. My friends are Brookline
parents. My child has Brookline friends.
My child went through Baker School and
Brookline High School (BHS) and
I taught many of your kids. I taught
Nicole's kids. I taught Lisa's kids. I taught Trisha's kids. I taught
Susan's kids. I mean, I taught a lot of
kids here.
So, I’ve taught many families here and it
really connects us to the
community. I want to highlight the
materials fee program because it is a special
program that keeps us here and makes us
really dedicated to this
community. I have a story that
starts at the beginning of my teaching and
ends today.
Um I started student teaching in 1995, so
I am kind of a mix of 30 and 31 years now.
I got my full-time job in January.
So, I’ve been teaching for about 30 and a
half years, I guess.
But, I want to share a story about my
first moments as a teacher. I started student teaching in the fifth grade at
Baker School in the fall of 1995.
of a combo cuz I started teaching student
teaching in 1995
and I got my full-time job in January.
So, I'm like 30 and a half years in, I
guess.
But, I wanted to tell a story that
happened the the very first moments of
my teaching career. So, I started student
teaching in the fifth grade at
Baker School in the fall of 1995.
I loved Baker School, the community, and
everything about teaching.
When a teacher in the sixth grade was let
go at Thanksgiving, I applied for the sixth grade job and hoped for the best.
I knew the sixth grade class was hard and
that my principal, Tom Cavanaugh, wanted an experienced teacher.
The interview committee had my principal,
the vice principal, a teacher, and five parents from the homeroom class.
This was my very first interview and it
was really scary.
But I thought, if nothing else, it was
good practice for a future job.
So, I did the interview and I went home
for winter break.
About a week later, I got a call from Mr.
Cavanaugh.
He told me that the parents in the
interview committee really wanted to hire me.
Then he said, "It's against my better
judgment, but I’m offering you the sixth grade position."
I was so excited and promised him I would
work hard to do a good job.
Tom was right to want an experienced
teacher because starting in January was really hard.
There were many behavior issues and
different learning needs in the sixth grade and especially in my homeroom.
The students were also feeling bad about
themselves.
The first thing they said to me when I
walked in was that I was going to hate their class.
It was terrible.
They said all the teachers hated their
class and I would hate them too.
I looked around and told them, "You are my
first class. I will love you."
And we will have a great rest of the year.
But I worried a lot in my mind.
I was 23, I looked about 15, and I had
never been in a classroom alone.
I called home many nights that year,
worried about the classroom behaviors and wondering if I was helping the kids.
My mom, a former teacher, kept saying, "If
you can get through this year, you can get through anything."
So, I kept trying, showing my students I
cared, that they were capable, and hoping to bring positivity to the room.
I know, it was terrible.
They said all the teachers hated their
class and I was going to hate them, too.
I remember looking around the room and
saying to them, "You're my very first
class. I'm going to love you." And we're
going to have a great rest of the year.
But in my mind, I was worried.
I was 23. I looked about 15 and I was
untested in a classroom by myself.
I remember calling home to stop bending
nights that year, worried about all the
classroom behaviors I was struggling with
and wondering if I was getting
through to these kids at all.
My mom, a former teacher, just kept saying
to me, "If you can get through
this year, you can get through anything."
So, I kept plugging away, letting my
students know how much I cared about
them, how capable they were, and hoping to
create some positivity in the room
from the negativity that had greeted me at
the start.
As the year was ending, I heard noise in
the hallway.
That is never a good sign.
I left the room to check if everything was
okay, but what I heard made me stop.
Some kids in another class were teasing
kids in my class.
The kids in my class replied,
"Oh, yeah? We are the smart class."
I felt a bit emotional and very happy.
We had come from a place where students
did not feel good about themselves.
They thought everyone disliked them.
Now, they felt like a group of smart and
important kids, which they were.
This memory reminds me how important it is
for kids to feel valuable and loved in school.
Today, 31 years later, I am still happily
at Baker in the same job I started in 1995.
Teachers are hired to teach subjects and
help students grow.
But one of the most important lessons I
learned happened in my first 6 months of teaching.
If students do not feel seen, cared for,
or valued, they will not learn well.
As I think about retiring soon,
I remember the almost 2,500 Brookline
students I have taught.
They might not remember everything about
cells,
but I hope they remember I cared about
them, believed in them,
and that their curiosity, strength, and
voice are important.
[applause]
Thank you, Esme.
Tom Cavana was a very smart man.
He made great choices about teachers.
Okay, Francesca Stark. [applause]
Hi everyone.
I am Francesca Stark.
I wanted to say I agree with everything
everyone has said.
That’s all for me.
Still, I was thinking about why I chose
Brookline, why I stayed here, and what I hope for Brookline.
Tom Cavana, he was a very smart guy.
Made very good decisions on teachers.
Okay, Francesca Stark. [applause]
Hi everybody. Um
So, I'm Francesca Stark, and I um
wanted to say I everything everybody
already said, so that's it.
Pretty much though. Um I was thinking
about why I came to Brookline, why I
stayed in Brookline, and what I hope for
Brookline.
I came to Brookline because my mom
was a struggling painter, and
she couldn't pay for my braces, so she
decided to become a teacher. She
heard about the Brookline schools, which
we have heard many times.
So, we moved to Westbourne Terrace to a
rent-controlled apartment, and I went to
Driscoll School.
There was a group that had
guidance counselors for everything then,
including children of single moms.
There was a guidance counselor who had
little rubber dolls
that we could use to act out some kind of
trauma.
I don’t know what they were for, but we
acted them out. And later when I got hired in
Brookline, I thought, "Oh, I am one of the
little rubber dolls now."
There was a firefighter rubber doll and
a nurse rubber doll, and I went to
school. So, I had a very good experience
at Driscoll.
I had a very bad fourth-grade
teacher who would mock kids in the class.
I always wanted to be a teacher, not
really because of her, but I wanted to
be a teacher that was different from her.
My mom told me, "Don't ever become a
teacher." After she was a painter, she
became a teacher.
She said, "They will not trust your
intelligence.
They will not let you do art. You will
never be
free to be who you are. You must
follow a structured plan. Don't do it."
I immediately decided to do
it anyway. So, I became a teacher, and
wait, I wasn't sure what to do, and I was
walking down the
Fenway, and I passed Wheelock College, and
I saw a sign that said,
"Come join the Learning Teaching
Collaborative, where teachers can be
leaders." I thought, "My mom would like
that." So, that's how I ended up there.
I walked in, and a woman named Joan Gatto
said,
"Did you hear about the job opening, the
intern opening?"
I said, "No." So, it was to
be an intern for someone named Vivian
Troen at the former Devotion School, and I
was lucky to
Troen um at the uh formerly known uh
Devotion School, and I was fortunate to
I was her intern for a full year.
I interned in Vivian's class, and I felt
lucky.
Everyone was smart and cared about
teaching.
They wanted to work together and learn
about kids.
They spent time at morning meeting to
learn about kids.
I thought this was perfect for me.
Then, Carol Schraft hired me.
She knew I was a student in that class.
She knew that teacher was not very good.
She said, "If you want to teach after that
class, you are hired."
So, I got the job.
Um
Anyway, I loved being an intern for a
whole year.
I got hired because I knew Brookline well.
I was part of the learning teaching
collaborative.
Betsy Fitzpatrick gave us vouchers.
We didn't pay for them, but we handed them
out.
We could take courses and do interesting
things.
So, what kept me in Brookline was
everything you all said.
My husband, who is over there, didn’t go
to Brookline schools.
But our kids went to Brookline schools.
We love it here.
I live on Westbourne Terrace now.
I know it sounds a little sad, but it’s
not really sad.
I am definitely a local.
I am bringing this up because I want to
share what I want for Brookline.
Um, I agree with what Liz said.
Teaching never gets easier.
Everyone asked if it gets easier, and I
said no.
It really doesn’t get easier.
Now, some things my mom said are becoming
true.
I want to talk to the School Committee
(the elected board that runs the public schools) about this.
More and more, the curriculum feels like a
conveyor belt.
This is just my opinion as a fifth grade
teacher.
I know it's not true for everyone.
There’s not enough time to know the kids
well.
There isn’t enough time for morning
meeting.
I do morning meetings every day.
everybody, I know. But, there's not enough
time to get to know
the kids. There's There's not enough time
for morning meeting. I do it every
The kids love the single day, but we
must put aside many other things.
We need to have more, so I will tell you
what I think. Sorry, but we need to
have better teamwork, so all the
teachers know and have time to see what
others have done. We need to
put together all our lessons because there
is not enough time to teach
everything. We need more teacher input and
time for teacher
teamwork, and I really think we should
bring back the mentor and internship
program because having a second
teacher in your classroom all year
gives you time to do things like go to the
bathroom, which I have a
urologist parent in my classroom, and she
says, "Teachers are the worst." I say, "I
know." We really are. So, we need to
have people working together all
year. Bring those teachers into our school
system. I found the 1996
version of how to do it. I had to dig it
up. I really did. So, that is what I want
to say. I
love teaching. I
love my colleagues, and I think now it is
time to
go back to saying what we care about and
doing
what we care about. Thank you very much.
[applause]
Thank you, Francesca. Allison Whitebone.
Hi, I'm Allison and I teach ninth grade
at Brookline High School. Thank you very
much for honoring us tonight. 31 years
go by quickly.
It is so crazy. Thanks
to my mom for being here and my husband
and
son and daughter. Hi, say hi. Okay.
I love teaching. I love Brookline High
School and I was not sure what to
talk about today, but one of my students
wrote in his journal about
Holden Caulfield and how he hates change.
My student said he hated change, but
through writing in his journal all year
and finishing 236 handwritten pages,
he decided he accepts change and he loves
it. So, I thought, I am going to
it. So, I thought, I'm going to
start with that about change and it
reminded me
of where I started, opportunity for
change.
And that's what Brookline means to me
and Bob, you helped start that
before I got there, but Brookline
made a great program for
students who needed it.
They made a family of teachers with Bill
Grady, Bill Hibbert, Jack
Liss, Eileen Lombardi, and many other
great people. Bob Gray helped us
from the town.
It created a wonderful feeling of
family, consistency, clarity, and
relationships
that I have continued for all of
these 31 years. It is
a calling. The poetry festival with Lynn
Cohen and all of the librarians
has been going for 31 years now, thanks to
the Parent-Teacher Organization (PTO).
It's all teamwork. It's all family, with
everyone sharing their stories,
like Geraldine Mondy and her siblings
telling their stories and
my friends in the English Department, and
Ed Weiser, who I went to graduate school
with. Remember our project on technology?
I started by
talking about handwriting in the journal.
And so, um [laughter]
it's the best technology there is. But, um
to keep it short, I just want to say
Brookline public schools are a
wonderful family. We take care of our
children. We take care of our staff. And
I love the teamwork, and I'm forever
thankful for these years. And
I am not done yet. I'm not done. I'm still
young. My mom is 86. Sorry, Mom.
And she still works. So, alright.
[laughter] I love you. Thank you very much
to
my whole team, and to everyone here today.
Thank you.
[applause]
Thank you, Ally. Ed Weiser, you're next.
Thank you. Thank you. [applause] Um yeah,
good evening. Thank you for
celebrating with all of us. Thank you for
staying for the last person to
speak. Um and um so, this is going to be
go. Um and um so, this is going to be
I thank the Brookline community,
especially the Brookline Education Foundation (BEF).
If I could go back thirty years and tell
myself that my teaching job would
include skydiving, flying helicopters, and
later
becoming an Emergency Medical Technician
(EMT), driving an ambulance on weekends,
to teach students about the medical field,
I would not have believed it.
I have had many adventures. Those I
mentioned
were all supported by the BEF.
For one special experience, Bob, I don't
remember where the money
came from for this. You might have helped,
but I went to a conference
at the Fermi National Accelerator
Laboratory, a huge particle collider, in Illinois that summer,
and I met Nobel Prize winner Leon
Lederman, and later started our first physics program
for ninth graders.
Brookline High School (BHS) became a
leader in helping more students take physics
and other science classes.
So much so that Jim Walsh,
right there, surprised the Department of
Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE)
because they created the Massachusetts
Comprehensive Assessment System (MCAS) exam for science,
and he said, "You need to include
physics." People were shocked.
Also, when Professor Lederman got a press
request,
he would just send it to me because he was
too busy. That was a big honor.
I was interviewed by the New York Times,
the Wall Street Journal, and more.
Then after
eleven years, Bob trusted me to lead the
science department.
We created more opportunities for
students.
We expanded the physical space of BHS for
the future.
A real point of pride is being the leader
of the team that was often
ranked among the top STEM schools in the
country.
Our classrooms are now full of creativity,
inclusion, and hard work.
I am very proud of that.
During the building project, I asked for a
good budget for equipment,
which included a medical simulation lab.
You can see three mannequins on the
third floor of the STEM wing. They might
seem a bit strange,
but they are useful.
Sorry if they creep you out.
One thing led to another and
the BEF helped me become an EMT.
Now I teach students how to figure out
what is wrong with Hal, not Mason, Hal the
mannequin, when he comes to our emergency
department (ED) with
shortness of breath and confusion.
shortness of breath and altered mental
status.
I stepped away from the leadership role.
I wanted to grow the medical careers
offerings.
I also added robotics, woodworking, and a
new construction class.
I never thought this would happen when Bob
turned on the light.
Do you remember that during my interview?
You would turn the lights on and off.
You asked the physics candidates to
explain what was happening.
Very few people could explain the physics
of an alternating current circuit.
I knew how to explain it. [laughter]
In my last chapter here, I have a few more
years to go.
I hope it will include an after-school
dual enrollment program for EMT certification.
This will be with MassBay Community
College.
[applause] Thank you. We have an initial
agreement.
We just need a few more steps to make it
happen.
Thank you to the BEF, the School Committee
(the elected board that runs the public schools), and everyone here.
Thank you, Betsy, for putting this all
together.
Thank you, everybody.
[applause]
That was very special.
The measure of a great organization is
stability.
This includes stable staff and leadership.
You all define that.
Stability in teaching, caring, and loving.
Each of your comments was impressive and
inspiring.
I was part of you for a long time, and I
love you all.
[clears throat] Thank you for your hard
work.
You can go home now. [applause]
YES. OKAY, WE'RE TAKING A 5-MINUTE BREAK.
If you want, Bob, I have notes on this
topic.
Yes, I saw them too.
I condensed them a bit.
If you want to read, go ahead.
Okay. Do you want to read it?
It doesn’t matter; I can read it.
Okay. Let me do it.
She's at home working.
She's on Zoom.
[music]
Mhm.
It was an amazing time, and we finished
all the good food.
Betsy, thank you for that food.
I know you paid for it.
[clears throat] Okay, we are going to
change the agenda a little bit because
Susan Gibbons needs to go home.
Um, we want to say goodbye and
thank you to our leaving Deputy
Superintendent for Administration and
Finance, Dr. Susan Gibbons.
I think Bella will do this part.
Am I? Oh my god, where is Susan?
She is right there. Hi Susan, can you come
over so we can talk to you?
[laughter] [clears throat]
No, I want you to talk about your golf
game.
Okay, fine.
I've been following your career for a
year.
Um, there have been big challenges, and I
know Bella
and you had to work very, very hard with
the team.
Um, but I am giving you
a lot of credit for building trust in the
town about finance.
Because of that [clears throat and cough],
the
Town of Brookline passed an override (a
vote to raise property taxes above the state limit) for 23 million dollars.
That is a big deal and it really helped
us.
Um, so I want to thank [clears throat] you
for all the hard work
in presenting to all the committees that
were getting ready for the override. And
that is a big achievement,
one we give you credit for, and Bella
gives you credit for too.
So, thank you for that. And I just sit
here and
listen to your talks on
budgeting and buses running on time,
and you are always very prepared.
You know your stuff, and we will miss you.
Um, I wish you
the best in the coming years of your life.
And, um, enjoy playing golf.
I hope your scores are good, and I would
like you
to tell me how you are doing on
the greens and fairways. Um, that’s
all I want to say. Thank you, and I open
it up for anyone else who wants
to say thank you. Um, we will miss you.
to say thank you. Um we will miss you.
I will really miss you. We have worked
together in talks.
You are amazing, Susan. Thank you very
much.
[applause]
Others, Jesse.
Yes, Susan, from the first time we met
over 2 years ago,
you and I became not just work friends,
but real friends.
I want to thank you for the friendship
first.
Then I thank you for all you have done in
the district.
We call each other to talk about many
things.
We discuss many topics together.
Our friendship has become special in my
time on the School Committee (the elected board that runs the public schools).
Whenever I had questions that were hard to
ask, you were there to help me.
And if you could not help, you told me,
which was also good.
We have achieved a lot together.
Your talk about the third quarter a couple
of weeks ago strengthened my trust in how you organized the district's finances.
Everything is running better now.
There are no financial problems now.
This year, I have not received any
questions or worries about the school district's financial health.
That is great!
I am sharing this good news with the
advisory committee and with other town leaders.
You have fixed and organized the financial
matters well.
I hope it is easy to pass this on to
Aaron.
You have left us with a much better
situation than before.
So, thank you.
Thank you for your friendship.
I plan to continue this work with you.
even in this short month and a half two
months, haven't gotten any
uh, questions or, uh, concerns about how
the financial health of the school
district is going. And that's, uh,
amazing. And I'm And I'm carrying that
message from you to the advisory
committee already. And to individuals, you
know, in town,
you know, other elected officials in the
town, both on the select board side, um,
town-school partnership, etc., because you
have really,
um, not only corrected, but, you know,
um, organized the financials in a way
that can be, hopefully, easily
transferred uh, to Aaron. And And have
left us on just a super improved
foundation over what you found it. So,
thank you. Thank you for your friendship.
I plan to
stay in touch with you. I have your phone
number.
Congratulations again on your retirement.
It is a great next step for you.
So, Sarah.
I also want to say thank you. You have
taught me a lot about school finance and budgets.
What impresses me is that each line in the
budget is not just a number.
Each line shows how it fits into the whole
school district and learning.
I appreciate all the experience you have
gained to get to where you are now.
You understand the whole picture and have
advised us well.
So, thank you.
Okay.
Oh, this is hard.
I am very happy for you.
I look forward to hearing about your new
adventures.
I hope we can stay in touch.
I remember the first budget book you
presented.
You organized everything into the right
categories.
I thought, this person wants to do things
the right way.
It is really hard work, but you are
committed to doing it right.
You are steady in your work.
Your commitment to excellence is clear.
It has helped us a lot.
I will miss having you here.
I wish you adventure, health, and fun.
Suzanne.
Suzanne, I have worked with a few deputy
superintendents for finance before.
Some were not clear in their work.
So, I want to thank you for putting us on
the right path.
You helped steady the ship we were
struggling with.
Your experience as a superintendent helped
a lot.
You were not just
be our person here. Um but I'm really
happy for you and I wish you um adventure
and health and fun.
Suzanne.
So, Suzanne, I've been through a few
deputy superintendents for finance and
um and they were a little murky along the
way. And so, I really want to thank you
for getting us on the right road to
steady the ship that we were teeter-
tottering around. Um
and I think it really helped that you had
a background as a superintendent, so
that you weren't you clearly weren't just
Numbers are important, but we understood
the
education choices we had to make, and
their
importance. This helped us talk better
because
we knew what we could discuss to make it a
better place for our students and families
in Brookline. Thank you for
bringing your experience and passion. I
know you have a lot of
passion because sometimes we go off topic
and
discuss learning and teaching. We talk
about how that
looks, what that
costs, and how important it is to keep
our students at the center of our
budget talks. I didn’t have that with
others, but you
have that background and passion. We made
you work with the numbers a
lot, but I know that is your passion,
and you showed it in our budget talks. So,
thank you for that. I want you to take a
break from numbers for now,
except maybe your golf score. I
wish you good health so you can enjoy your
retirement. Thank you so much, Susan.
Thank you, Susan. Is there anyone else?
Faisal?
Thank you. It is working. Okay. I just
want to
say thank you for your service and wish
you luck. Thank you.
Susan? Alright, I’m Donna.
Oh, just Donna Wanek. I will be quiet now.
Susan, I don’t want to repeat what anyone
said, but I just want to add that
I really respect that you chose to
finish your career in Brookline and stayed
here for the
last two years or year and a half, even
though it was really tough.
I don’t want to just end on a positive
note, but
I feel the community wasn’t always as
thankful
for your efforts as we should have been.
So I want to say we are so grateful
for everything you’ve done.
The work you put in here will
really last long after you leave.
of your efforts as we should have been.
And so I want to make sure to say we are
so grateful
for everything that you've done.
I think the work that you put in here is
going to like really outlive
We are very thankful for your time here.
Thank you.
It is sad to say goodbye to the
most experienced person in the
senior leadership team and finishing her
third year. We
could not have managed this
without you helping us. And how much
you learned while you were here.
You know what? There is not one
system that is simple here in Brookline.
Every single system has its own details,
and it is more complicated. So no matter
how many years of experience someone may
have elsewhere, everything is a bit
different here. And I really
appreciate how much you helped us, but we
would not be where we are today without
you. And also Susan in the
last couple of months, as she is in her
final days here, has been working
very hard to make sure
we are ready for this change
and the future. It is a very
special quality and commitment,
dedication that you have shown us
from the first day I met you
to the last day here. And so
she is not finished yet, but
she is close and
working very hard until the end. And so I
truly appreciate everything that you have
done for us as a colleague and a
friend.
And the care that you put into it.
So, thank you. [applause]
[laughter] [clears throat]
So, is it working? Yeah? There we go.
Well, um
this feels strange for me to be at
the end of this journey in my life
and to be here at this moment with you.
it's I guess uh surreal for me to be at
the end of this uh journey in my life
um and to be here at this moment to share
it with you.
These last 3 years have been hard. I have
had to use 1|everything I have learned in my life 2|[laughter] to help me get through 3|each and every 4|challenge that has come up. 5|But I have to say 6|this is what I was raised for. 7|You have moments in your life 8|and you don’t really see 9|what you have learned until you face 10|another challenge where you need 11|all your strength to get through. 12|One good thing about 13|being further in your career 14|is that you find some balance 15|in yourself. 16|You know certain things are true, and this helps you 17|get through tough times. 18|You don’t worry 19|about what others think, 20|and you can move forward with your values, understandings, 21|and beliefs. What drives me 22|every day 23|is doing something to help 24|students learn better. 25|That is my goal. 26|I hope that my work here will help you 27|focus on teaching instead of 28|administration all the time. 29|If I did one small thing to help 30|you get closer to that, I will feel my time here was worth it. Thank you 31|for letting me serve you in this community. 32|[applause] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. 33|Um, 34|[clears throat] I might get in trouble here. I 35|just want everyone to notice Faisa's 36|matching shoes and earrings. They are 37|really nice. Just 38|look at them. 39|Am I in trouble?
to bear every single learning experience
of my life
[laughter] um to kind of navigate through
um each
and every
uh challenge that has uh arisen.
But, I have to say uh that is what um
I guess I was raised for, right? I mean,
you come to moments in your life
um and you don't really appreciate um what
you've learned from every
experience that you've had until you face
yet another experience where it requires
um every ounce of fortitude that you have
in order to get through.
And I think one of the blessings of uh
being
um along in your career
is that you get a pretty
uh centeredness about yourself.
You know certain things to be true, and it
helps you to navigate through
difficult times.
You know, you don't You don't concern
yourself with public opinion,
um and you're able to move forward
grounded in your values, understandings,
and beliefs. I know that, uh, what
motivates me each
and every day
is doing something that helps
improve education for students.
That is what I am about.
It's my hope that the work that I've
done here will allow you in the future
to be able to focus on the instructional
minute and not on administration all the
time.
So, if I've done one small thing to get
you closer to that, I'll feel like my time
here has been worth it. Thank you
for allowing me this opportunity to serve
you in this community.
[applause] Thank you. Thank you. Thank
you. Um,
[clears throat] maybe I I want to get in
trouble here. I
just want everybody to note Faisa's
matching shoes and earrings. They're
Just take a check. Check it out.
Just
nice. Am I Am I in trouble?
Just like my eyes were Whoa.
Okay. Thank you, Faisa.
Okay, we have a consent agenda to vote on.
It includes old records, bills to pay,
and a student trip at Klein High School
for a queer student program fall retreat at YMCA camp
High Rock Mount Washington, Massachusetts.
Any comments on these three items?
[clears throat] I will make a motion if
you need. Do you have something to add? Yeah, I will second it.
Motion by Suzanne. I second it.
Second by Jesse. Jesse, how do you vote?
Um, I want to point out that the trip
still does not have a cost.
It hasn't gone to the finance and capital
committee yet,
I think. As I read it, it's a proposal
with dates, but no prices yet. I Okay. So, we’re agreeing to plan it.
Right. Okay. Okay. Okay, thank you.
There are numbers on it, Jesse.
There are numbers, yes. There are numbers
listed.
And I think we should mention that the
date is also confirmed by Yes.
Yes, it is on the last page.
Jesse.
Here it is. Here. $4,017.
Is that Val? No, that was me.
Yeah, that was Carolyn. Okay.
Is Val here? I chimed in earlier, yes.
Yes, Bob.
Okay. Thanks. Okay, [clears throat] want
to vote?
Jesse? Yes. Carolyn? Yes.
Sarah? Yes. Uh Val? Yes.
Um Carolyn? I'm Suzanne?
Here, Carolyn. Yes. Donna?
Yes. Bob Winter's vote is yes. Okay.
Faisa? Yes. And Ms. Faisa?
I did not miss her shoes though. Okay.
Okay, now we have public comment (time
when any resident can speak). Uh Betsy, I think we have a few, right?
I have five people right now, yes.
Five? So, that should work now, right?
Mhm. You get about three minutes, not more
than three minutes each.
Uh we will not comment on your comments,
and who is up first?
One moment. You can hear you guys now.
Okay.
Hey, sorry did you call on me? I wasn't
sure. I just turned into a panelist.
One moment. You can hear you guys now.
Okay.
Hey, sorry did you call on me? I wasn't
sure. I was just turned into a panelist.
Go early. Thanks, hi. Um my name's Arly
Butler. Um
I'm a Brookline resident and Francis W.
Parker School (FR) parent to three children, a room parent, a Parent-Teacher Organization (PTO)
volunteer. And next year, my youngest son,
Ben, will transition from the Brookline Early Education Program (BEEP) to
kindergarten at FR. I'm here tonight, or
at least virtually,
um to respectfully ask the district to
think again about reducing FR's
kindergarten from five sections down to
four, or at least to pause this
decision until fall enrollment numbers are
fully finalized.
[cough] Excuse me. Kindergarten [clears
throat]
is an important change for child
development.
For five-year-olds coming from small
preschools, entering FR, which is the
largest elementary school in Brookline, is
a big adjustment. Class size
matters a lot at this age. Larger classes
mean less personal attention
during a key time for growth. Fewer adults
watching the children who may be quietly
struggling, and less help as they learn
how to get around a big public school.
The district's current reason is that
overall numbers are low, making
FR average 19.5 students per class. But
looking at this data through an
equity lens tells a different story. If
you compare English Language Learner (ELL) and Individualized Education Program (IEP) data
across the district, FR has the highest
numbers by far. We have more
students with complex needs, but now fewer
teachers to support them.
Furthermore, framing the removal of the
kindergarten section as a budgetary balance to fund
a necessary fifth-grade section doesn't
make sense. The needs of a fifth
grader and a kindergartner are completely
different. Our youngest learners
should not have to give up their important
first year. If the district must
cut a section to balance the budget, it
doesn't make sense under an
equity lens to target FR. Within
Brookline, FR does not have the
smallest kindergarten classes. It's unfair
to take a section from a school that already has
higher enrollment and crowd our students,
while
keeping schools with much lower enrollment
unchanged.
Finally, relying only on June 1st numbers
is too early. We know enrollment
changes over the summer.
In fact, from just talking to my
community, I know of five families with
kindergartners who are moving to the
neighborhood. They fully
plan to attend FR this fall, but due to
some moving issues, they have not
yet been able to officially register.
Once a section is cut, it is very hard to
reverse. Many of us in the
community supported the override (a vote
to raise property taxes above the state limit) because we believed it would
help maintain the quality of Brookline
education. Crowding our
incoming kindergarten classes is not the
experience we voted to
preserve. I urge you to keep the fifth FR
kindergarten section open until fall
enrollment is clear, and to communicate
clearly with our incoming
families. Thank you for your time, hard
work, and all your help.
Thank you, Willie.
Is Midori here? Midori Nagano?
[clears throat] Uh, two here.
Yes. Um, my name is Masahiro Nagano and I
am a parent of two children in F.A. Rawson community.
My older son, Sora, is in grade one. My
younger son, Haru, is in pre-K.
Our home is in the buffer zone between
Pierce and Lawrence schools.
But F.A. Rawson is the closest school to
our home.
When we moved to Brookline two years ago,
we requested to F.A. Rawson and were accepted easily.
Since then, our family has been part of
the F.A. Rawson community for two years.
During that time, we have never moved.
Last year, we did not receive any school
reassignment at all.
We expected to spend the coming year at
F.A. Rawson, like the other families.
However, both of our children were
suddenly assigned to Pierce School for next year.
We understand that school assignment is
complicated.
But I want to ask one simple question:
Do you really think it is good for our
children to force them to leave their school community?
They have already spent years growing,
adjusting, and feeling like they belong.
When Sora first started at F.A. Rawson, he
struggled to adjust to the new environment.
He even needed support from the school
counselor.
Only recently has he built confidence and
a strong connection to the school.
Both of our sons love F.A. Rawson.
They know the teachers, the building, and
the other children.
Every day after school, they happily play
with their friends at the playground.
So when they heard they might have to
transfer, both of my sons cried and asked why they had to be separated from their friends.
Until last year, I knew many families
where younger siblings followed older siblings to the same school, no matter the district.
Uh, when Sora first entered, uh, F.A.
Rawson, he struggled and to adjust a new
environment and even
needed support from our school counselor.
Uh, only recently has he, uh,
built a stable and confident, uh,
deeply connected to the school. Uh, both
of our son, uh, love F.A. Rawson and
they know the teachers and buildings and
the children, and
every day after school they happily
operate with their friends at playgrounds.
So, when they heard they might be forced
to
transfer the proposed our both of my sons
cried and asked why they had to be
separated from their friends.
So, that until last year I knew multiple
families in which the younger siblings are
just follow to the older siblings at
the same school regardless of the
district.
Many parents from F R R told us that
they feel very confused about the recent
decision.
We saw the same upset during a
conversation with many of the Parent- Teacher Organizations
and the school principal present.
So, this issue affects more than just our
family.
I want to share concerns about the plan to
cut one
kindergarten class at F R R. If one class
goes away, then the average
class size will get much bigger, which is
not fair for education.
We feel that
the school assignment issue was unfair
because it seems aimed at reducing
the number of students as much as
possible.
So, I respectfully ask the
school district and community to rethink
both the kindergarten class
cut at F R R and
the decision regarding our situation
that forces enrolled students
like our son to move to a new school.
These choices are not just numbers on a
list.
They involve real children, real
families, and a real school community.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Midori.
Next is Jordana Spitz. Jordana?
Are you on Zoom?
Hello.
My name is Jordana, and I am a guidance
counselor at Ridley School for
the young kids in grades K-2. I have
written about 20 speeches in the last few weeks because
I really care about the cuts at Ridley
School. I want to
share some numbers about enrollment as I
meet with all
the families during the summer and school
year.
Our enrollment numbers are the highest
they have ever been because of the
cut in classes. I want to share some data
about
enrollment, especially for Hebrew-speaking
families that we cannot
ignore. This past school year,
from July 1st to the end of the school
year, Ridley enrolled 109 students,
including 82 who registered over the
summer.
Out of those, 14 were kindergarteners,
and 11 spoke Hebrew.
The year before that, 2024-2025, Ridley
had 118 students, with 78 coming in
during the summer. Out of those students,
again, 14
were kindergarteners, with 10 speaking
Hebrew, and an additional 40
students joined during the school year,
including nine more kindergarteners.
The children who are here
in Brookline live all over Brookline but
come to Ridley because of the
Hebrew-speaking program and they cannot be
sent elsewhere.
Ridley is also, as you may have
heard many times, a very special
community, and a Title 1 school. We
have the largest number of English
Learners. We
have the largest number of low-income
learners. Sorry, that's my dog crying.
In the TLC program, we help a
homeless shelter in our
neighborhood, and we have the largest
number of families arriving from
Israel every year, many affected
by war and trauma. According to
the Department of Elementary and Secondary
Education (DESE), 46% of our students qualify as
high-needs. That 46% is in a school
of nearly 900 kids. I could talk about
fairness, I could
talk about all that, but I want to share
how it feels at Ridley School. Turnover is high. This
year alone, we had three new first-grade
teachers and a whole new K-2 learning
center team. Staff often move to other
Brookline schools. I see it
often, and they come back and say, "Wow,
it's so different!"
Right now, our kindergarten teachers and
I, after working here for 20
years, feel very discouraged. The
unfairness is having a big impact. Based
on steady numbers, we know we will
enroll over 100 students during the
summer, many of whom are kindergarteners
that cannot be sent to other schools. I
kindly ask that you
bring back the removed section as soon as
possible.
Doing this now would help us keep an
excellent teacher, create really
schedule. We can't do any of these things
without knowing our groups. If
the decision is delayed until August, we
will have to hurry, get an
inexperienced teacher, change class
assignments, and tell more than 80
families about the change in class.
Also, kindergarten is the place to save
some money. These kids
are very young. Some are learning to use
the bathroom. They are crying.
They are running out of the classroom.
They need a lot of help from teachers. No
curriculum will change that.
Lastly, I want to thank
Bella for being open to talking with me
and having discussions about this.
I really appreciate it, and I appreciate
your attention to the numbers
for the next few weeks because they change
a lot at Ridley
school. Thank you. [applause]
Thank you very much, Jordana.
Next up, Benny Weingarten-Gabbay.
Not here? Uh Jessica Jessica Schneider.
[clears throat]
Hi everyone. My name is Jessica Schneider,
and I am a parent at Florida
Ruffin Ridley.
As we meet on the day before Juneteenth, I
hope we can think about how Juneteenth's
values of fairness, remembering, and
truth are shown in the choices we make
for students here in Brookline.
Many families are worried
about the simple question, "Why is Florida
Ruffin Ridley set to lose a kindergarten?"
Other Brookline kindergarten classes, like
Lawrence, Lincoln, and Runkle, are
expected to have about 12 to 13
students per class next year, while
Florida
Ruffin Ridley is expected to have about
18 to 20 after losing a class.
Now, I am not saying every school must
have the same
class sizes. I am asking why the
administration's favored choice is
for Florida Ruffin Ridley to have
kindergarten classes about 50%
larger than some other Brookline schools.
I have received many messages, and the
administration has said other
factors were considered, including
staffing, facilities, and enrollment.
These decisions are complicated, and I
appreciate that.
But families are already feeling the
effects, like you just heard.
Some families have siblings going to
different schools, and
for many families, especially immigrant
families, changing schools can mean
losing support networks that took a long
time to build.
It is confusing that, based on the
district's estimates, FRR was not the
only school that could take in fewer
students.
This makes me wonder
what specific reasons led the
administration to pick FRR instead of
any of the other options.
My next question is about fairness. FRR,
as you know, is a Title 1 school.
Research shows that smaller class sizes in
the early grades help
students succeed, especially those who
have been underserved.
Brookline's equity policy promises the
district will find and fix
gaps in educational experiences and
opportunities.
Can this group explain how making the
largest expected kindergarten classes
at a Title 1 school matches that promise?
My last question is about risk. We have
been told that enrollment is changing
and that it is too soon to know what final
enrollment will look like. But if
enrollment estimates are uncertain, why
are they certain enough to
remove a kindergarten class at FRR today?
And if those estimates are wrong, FRR
starts with having the
largest expected kindergarten classes in
the district and may need to hire later
in the summer from fewer teacher
candidates.
Since having good teachers is important
along with class size, late summer hiring
makes the risks for students even greater.
What analysis shows why having the largest
expected class sizes,
the most enrollment risk, and teacher
quality is focused at Florida Ruffin Ridley?
I believe everyone involved wants the best
while facing tough choices. I am asking for clear information
about a decision that seems to put a
heavy load on one school
community. Thank you. [applause]
Thank you, Jessica. So, Benny wasn't here.
How about Rosen Valtchev? Val-
Valtchev. Uh they are coming later. So,
doing [clears throat] two sections of
Oh, they’ll do later? They were told to
come Oh, they were told. Okay, cool. Okay,
great. Um item number four on the agenda,
welcome
Oh, they'll do later? They were told to
come Oh, they were told. Okay, cool. Okay,
great. Um item number four on the agenda,
welcome
Annika Banerji is from Brookline High
School.
She is our new student representative.
Welcome, Annika.
I asked Annika to tell us about herself.
She will explain what she does at the high
school and how she got this job.
That’s all.
Thank you. My name is Annika Banerji. I am
a sophomore at Brookline High School.
I am very grateful to be here with all of
you.
I look forward to being the School
Committee (the elected board that runs the public schools) representative for the school years 2026 and 2027.
Here are a few things about me.
I grew up in Singapore and New York City.
Both are big cities with many people.
I moved to Brookline when I was in middle
school.
When I moved here, I saw it is more than
just a small town.
First, we are not a very small town.
Second, it has unique dynamics and
relationships.
Since I joined the high school, I am part
of our student-run school newspaper, The Cypress.
There, I share stories and listen to
stories from many people in our community.
When I ran for this role, I wanted to
share my view of Brookline with everyone.
I want to show that Brookline is not just
where we live, but it is our town.
As a voice for students at Brookline High
School, I hope to bring that feeling.
Thank you. [applause]
How did you get selected for this
position?
Because it pays a lot. [laughter]
So, you had to submit a written
application first.
Then, you came in for an interview with
our student government.
Brookline is very special. We have a
complex student government with different parts.
You had to give a speech to the student
council.
Then, your student government would vote
to see if you were a good candidate for the job.
So, you were elected like us.
Yes, that was my first time.
I know. We are a peer group. Okay.
student government. And Brookline's very
unique. We have a very complex student
government with multiple branches and
you were required to give a speech to the
student council and then your own
student government would vote on whether
um, you would be an
acceptable candidate for the job.
So, you were elected like us.
Yeah, that's the first time.
I know. We're a peer group. Okay.
All right. Thank you, Annika, and we are
glad you are here.
Um, okay.
Next, we will have presentations and talks
about
current issues. First is Brookline's
METCO program presentation by Malcolm
Cawthorn. Welcome, Malcolm.
Hello and thank you for being here today.
It is a privilege and an honor to be here.
Um,
it is a privilege and honor to talk about
METCO tonight.
I hope I can present
well enough and leave time for questions.
Um,
I want to say that I am a classroom
teacher.
I have been interrupted by students
before.
If I say something that confuses you,
please stop me. Um,
you will probably be nicer than my
16-year-old students.
Um, I want to share an important comment
as we begin.
Last week, a marker was placed
in downtown Boston to honor Ruth
Batson and the NAACP's 14 demands from
Boston Public Schools. I think it is
important to recognize Ruth Batson,
the woman often called the mother of
METCO,
and that many people see those
demands today
and notice the same fight in front of us,
63 years later.
Uh, as we talk about METCO, we will also
discuss the 60th anniversary and
what that means. It is really important to
note that,
when I speak tonight,
I carry history with me. Um,
I am not just speaking for myself.
I speak for a program
and for a town and for things that
mean a lot to many people.
Thank you for your time. Um,
I am not telling Betsy what to do, but um,
this is a slide with some history and
demographics. I think it is really
important to start by remembering
the key things that led to
So this is a side with some history and
demographics. I think it's really
important um that we start in remembering
that much of the crucial things that led
to
METCO happened in 1964 in Brookline.
This building is not under construction.
It has been renovated many times.
In 1964, Brookline residents from a civil
rights group came to this committee.
They said we need to help what is
happening in Boston.
Most people do not know this.
They think the events started in 1974 with
Judge Garrity.
But it actually started in 1964.
It is important to remember this history.
In 1965, the president, now called the
chair, took action.
He created a temporary committee.
They worked with Boston and Brookline
civil rights activists.
They helped create a program for students
to move from Boston to Brookline.
In 1966, METCO was officially created.
It filed papers with the state.
By September 8th, 1966, it started running
with a grant.
Later, it received state funding.
In 1974, Brookline got its first METCO
director.
I mention this because it is the same year
as the Judge Garrity decision.
Some of the first METCO students, called
riders, have shared their stories.
They say there was no one there
specifically to support them.
They were just told to go to school.
They had to get on the bus and go to
school alone.
Pam King, a civil rights activist, talks
about this today.
She is the daughter of Mel King.
She says it would have been hard to send
her kids to METCO.
She mentioned that it would have been
different if there had been a director.
In 1974, Brookline also hired a
coordinator for Brookline High School.
Gretchen Underwood became the METCO
coordinator in that year.
We hope you see that over time,
METCO and the town have really progressed.
METCO. And then, not to pat myself on the
back cuz she's speaking about me
metaphorically, she's saying, "But it
would have been different if we
had a Malcolm." If there was a director.
The same year we also hired a BHS
coordinator. So, uh that's, you know,
one of the long-standing names in this
town through school, Gretchen Underwood,
is that METCO coordinator in '74. And so,
what I hope you'll see is, whoop, over
time, um
we've really progressed with METCO as
well as the town.
Okay. Next slide please.
Right now, we have 299 students.
We can have 303 students.
This number is set by the Department of
Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE).
These students are in all 8 K-8 schools.
Some districts keep students in specific schools.
They also go to Brookline High School
(BHS).
We have 18 staff members right now.
This includes an executive assistant, a
BHS coordinator,
and an advisor, eight K-8 advisors, three
social workers, and three bus monitors.
Keeping enough students is important for
our program's funding from DESE.
To have the staff we need, we must keep
our student numbers high.
If not, funding may be reduced, and we
won't serve METCO students properly.
I will not read the vision now.
One important goal of METCO is to promote
integration and diversity in many ways.
This is not just about race, which was the
original goal.
Originally, it was a desegregation
program.
But now, METCO brings many kinds of
diversity.
For example, Brookline's population has
changed a lot.
Many of our METCO families represent
working-class, middle-class,
and upper middle-class people of different
races who do not live in Brookline.
Two years ago, Boston Magazine named
Boston's Black 100.
Four of these were Brookline METCO
parents.
These are not just METCO parents; they are
Brookline METCO parents.
It is important to understand this.
METCO brings religious, cultural, and
ethnic diversity to our district.
Next slide, Betsy.
But, METCO brings
a host [snorts] of diverse things, and
I'll point out one.
You know, the shifts in the town of
Brookline have shifted populations in a
lot of ways. A lot of our METCO families
represent
working class, middle class, and even
upper middle class folks of race that
don't necessarily live in the town of
Brookline.
Two years ago, Boston Magazine did
Boston's Black 100.
Four Brookline METCO parents were in
there.
Not METCO parents, Brookline METCO
parents.
And so, it is really important to kind of
grasp that piece,
um, but it's religious, it's cultural,
it's ethnic diversity, it's all those
things that METCO helps bring to our
district.
Um, next slide, Betsy.
This is our organization chart. Um,
This took a lot of work, not just the
design
but to get us to this point. Um,
I saw two of the previous directors,
Dr. Susie Tulu-Dar and Dr. Keith Lezama.
They said, "We can't believe you did it."
I want to thank both of
them for starting this project, especially
Keith Lezama for
getting an advisor for each school. This
is something principals
requested. People were sharing schools,
and
this made them make tough choices.
One school had a big problem, and another
school had an Individualized Education Plan
that needed a lot of help. Which school
should I go to
if both need attention?
They couldn't do it. It has really
helped a lot to have an advisor in every
school.
I want to mention the picture there. Um
Joanne Sylva Enjoku could not come
tonight. She is dealing with some
personal and family matters.
She is often called the origami lady.
She does that to help kids open up and
also helps with
fine motor skills and cultural learning.
Joanne was one of the people honored
tonight for 30 years of service.
I wanted her picture here because she is
retiring this year too.
But she will retire working for the town
of Brookline and
for half of the METCO program's time in
Brookline.
I want to make sure, since she couldn't be
here, that we at
least had a chance to honor her and see a
little bit of her work with children in
origami.
Thank you. So,
I can't tell you how often I get asked,
"How do you get into METCO?" or get a
call saying, "Can you get my child into
METCO?" The answer is almost
always no. But to explain,
it is important to know that the METCO
program takes every application.
I never get an application.
Then they run their lottery.
This is changing. This year they had four
separate lotteries.
The first one was in early December, and
there are dates and things like that.
METCO meets with Public Schools of
Brookline enrollment to understand space.
Brookline MicroSchools ask for referrals
from METCO in late January early.
In February, we meet about enrollment.
This is mainly about our senior class.
We wait until after mid-year exams. We see
if students will graduate or not.
This helps us start planning, but it does
not give us the full picture.
We talk to the enrollment team. We begin
looking for new students.
When we get referrals, we look for two
kinds.
We want referrals for kindergarten
students.
Mekko has a sibling preference. If a child
has a brother or sister in our district, they can skip the lottery.
That's how we begin our process.
After getting referrals, we hold meetings.
We try to do these in person, but we also
offer Zoom for those who cannot attend.
We have family intake meetings. I meet
one-on-one with a social worker and the family.
We collect important information during
these meetings.
Next, we hold kindergarten day. This is
with the BEEP program.
Kids sit in on BEEP classes. We want to
see them interact without their parents.
Then we start placing families into
schools.
This is like solving a puzzle.
We want siblings to be in the same school,
but there are limited spaces.
So, we have to figure out how to fit
everyone into available spots.
It takes a lot of time, but it is worth
the effort.
This helps us understand families and
introduce them to MECO.
We try to place them where they can
succeed.
This can be challenging, especially for
four- or five-year-olds looking ahead to age 18.
But we feel we have enough information to
make good choices.
They came in, they sat in on BEEP classes.
We wanted to see them
interacting in particular without mom
and dad next to them.
And then, we start to place families.
And that is a bit of a puzzle.
Cuz again, with siblings, we want to make
sure they're in the same school.
But we only have spaces so many. So, we
have to like work the puzzle so that we
can fit the spaces that were provided at
those places.
And so, you know, that's a it takes a
long time, and it's um
I would say well worth it. It helps us
really get to know families, introduce
them to ourselves and what MECO is, and
then place them as best as we can within
our schools to be successful, which is
hard with a four- or five-year-old
projecting until they're 18.
But, we feel like we have enough
information
to try. So, that's where we go.
All right. Next slide, please.
Our budgeting process, the Department of
Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE) has the information for our
distribution of funds. It's a budget line
in the state budget. They divide
it up and tell us, DESE tells Brookline
how much state grant
money we will receive from that budget
line. I found that out last Friday.
Now, they give us some clues a little bit
ahead of time.
But, the official information I received
was last Friday, and it might be wrong.
And I say that because the governor hasn't
signed it yet.
While they are still negotiating and
discussing everything else,
I might find out in July that it's a
little less than what we expect,
or I could find in July that it's a little
more, but that's how it works. We wait
for them to tell us, and then we set a
budget. The budget is then
submitted and approved by the Public
Schools of Brookline (PSB) Finance.
It is signed by the superintendent and
then sent to DESE for approval.
DESE limits how METCO money can be
spent. Any money spent must
directly help Brookline's METCO program
and its
students. This does not mean it can't help
other Brookline students.
But, if it only helps Brookline students,
we will face issues. We have faced
issues before. I think it's really
important to know
that if I can't show that it's helping
METCO students,
DESE can say, "You have to change how you
use that money."
This often happens, especially with
teachers.
As far as I know, I asked Susie to
research that.
Since as early as 2011, the Brookline
METCO program has always paid for
PSB teachers.
This year there are five teachers, costing
almost
$600,000.
That we just pay for. So, I believe we
have to show which ones apply and directly
help METCO students.
I think that's really important for us to
know.
Next slide, please.
So, you guys received an annual report.
We have three big goals this year. You see
many pictures of our students
doing various activities. I will mention a
few things. We talk about
caregiver engagement; you can see a
picture of the parents we honored.
You also see different pictures of them
too.
And some pictures of our students; the top
middle one is me reading
to fourth graders. I can't believe I got
up off the floor after that, but
Last Friday was a beautiful day. I was
reading poetry.
Two of our graduates are from Brown.
The rising ninth grader day.
Here is a group picture of our seniors.
The picture is with Superintendent Wong
and
Anthony Meyer, the BHS coordinator.
We are also working on a big project with
MIT and the Sloan School.
We are looking at how to help students
move from one grade to another.
I will explain more about that. Moving
from grade eight to grade nine is important,
but we are also focusing on a new pilot
program from grade five to six next year.
I will explain that more later. We also
want to celebrate METCO turning 60
next year, which is a big event.
It is a big event. I will explain more
about it soon.
Now, let's look at the next slide.
Did we meet our goals?
That is always a hard question. I think we
did well.
We still have more work to do. Some of
these goals we will repeat.
I will go through these quickly.
We want to return to in-person and Zoom
parent meetings like we had before COVID.
Every other month, we have coffee talks on
Friday where parents can Zoom in and see what is happening.
We have a community family engagement
advisor who plans events for METCO and community adults.
We started a monthly newsletter for
caregivers, alumni, and community members.
I know this goes to the school committee.
If you are in this room and not receiving it, please let me know.
We will add you to the list.
We also started exit interviews
or a questionnaire this spring.
This is for graduating eighth graders,
12th graders, and their caregivers to give us feedback before they leave each school.
We also look at academic transitions,
led by our learning outcomes advisor, who
tracks grade data.
You saw the picture of the BHS eighth
graders visiting.
They visit the eighth graders at their
school and then bring them to the high school for a day.
We have a move-on-up ceremony that some of
you attended for the rising ninth graders and graduating 12th graders.
We are starting a pilot for sixth grade at
Driscoll to help fifth graders prepare for moving from one classroom to five teachers daily.
Finally, for METCO's 60th anniversary, we
are starting a summer writing project.
school for a day. Um we have a move on up
ceremony that
some of you were at with the rising ninth
graders as well as the graduating
12th graders. And again, starting a pilot
for sixth grade at
Driscoll to help see successes in our
fifth graders going into from a single
classroom to meeting with five teachers
daily. And then finally, METCO 60. We're
launching a summer writing project. I'll
make sure that gets to all of you.
Um there will be a reading in November. We
want to start METCO, the Metropolitan Council for Educational Opportunity, Day.
Brookline METCO Day is September 8th.
That's the first day those buses came in
1966.
We will have panel conversations with the
first writers as well as
part of my privilege and honor in being
here. Um
METCO is going into its 60th year.
Brookline has had five METCO directors.
I am the fifth.
In four years, I have seen districts
have five METCO directors.
And so that's why it's very serious for me
and such an honor, but it says a lot about
this town, this district, and what this
means that we have had only five in 60
years.
Okay. Um we will also have a little
celebration at METCO Homecoming. We
are having a METCO Career Day as well as
um
one of those panels and a celebration and
then um in February a METCO
celebration. Um yeah.
So when I think about my leadership and
where we are going
it has been a good, fruitful time and
there have been
hard things that I don't want to focus on,
but because
those things have been hard, it has been
hard to create consistency.
And so, you will hear me say that
throughout these leadership and
directions. One of the goals is to create
consistency in the Brookline
METCO staff and organizational structure
so that the METCO program grows with new
central administration in schools.
Um you know uh
it's been complicated yet fruitful with
all the changes that have
happened here as well as in the schools.
Um and so we want to make sure we are
strong on the ground so we can work
with all the changes. Part of that is
having an advisor in every school to help cover
and really build the program. I think
we are done growing in that way.
Now we need to solidify what that means
and how we interact with schools and
central administration. We want to create
consistent
communication and connection between METCO
staff, schools, caregivers, and both
Boston and Brookline communities. This is
complicated, and it's one of the
things we will discuss more, but
establishing that means
we need to know how people find our
information. Is it email? Is it the
is you know, how do people know to look
for our information? Is it email? Is it the
Is there a newsletter? We work with
parents.
We focus on the bus situation.
I tell Kefa Zama what I know about the
bus.
I am not sure.
We found that texting works better for
parents about the bus.
We send messages like, "Hey, the bus is 5
minutes late."
So, we text them.
This has worked much better, but finding a
steady way is hard.
It has taken a lot of trying and learning.
We need to think about how to communicate
with schools and teachers.
These are important things.
Brookline has eight very different K-8
schools.
I always thought they should be different.
They serve very different groups of
students.
They have different setups and more.
But, we must understand each one each
time.
It is a good challenge, but still a
challenge.
We want to build strong support for
students and families.
We want to create chances for students and
families to succeed after graduation.
One easy example is building bridges in
the College Proven Program.
We have worked with them for a while.
They give college advice and support
historically black colleges and universities.
We also work with other programs, like
Steps to Success and AALSP.
We want to have shared accountability with
the Public Schools of Brookline, METCO Incorporated, and the METCO Directors Association.
I said we have been very busy since April
break.
This is not a bad thing.
An example of this teamwork is on Friday,
May 29th, at the end-of-the-year celebration.
That day was also the 7th and 8th grade
track meet.
It was also the day METCO Directors had
their middle school retreat.
We must work together better.
We have to figure this out.
We must keep working together so that all
kids can have chances.
Those events are all opportunities.
We do not want our kids to miss any of
them.
But some had to miss because of this.
[laughter] We have to figure that out. And
um and
so, yeah, I mean, it's it's just it's just
to continue the work in in
collaborating so that our kids can have
every opportunity cuz all three of those
are or opportunities. And we don't want
our kids to miss any
of them. But some had to because of all
that, you
People could not reach all the crossing
locations. And then the last
thing is to set regular ways to measure
the Brookline METCO program's
success. This means looking at program
success, student
grades, and other factors.
I think we are ready to do this. We have
the strength, we have met the goals,
and we are figuring out what regular
measurements to use each year.
Next slide.
For data collection, I think it is
important to view METCO in its own way.
Often, METCO gets mixed with other racial
groups or programs.
We have worked hard to show the
differences. I would say METCO Incorporated
has done the same. In that presentation,
there is a link to
the summary of the Seton report that METCO
Inc. asked for. This study went from
2002 to 2020.
It was a long study. It looked at many
things. I will not explain it all,
but this study was done by METCO Inc. to
show how well
METCO works. We also have a learning
outcomes advisor, Mr. Loren Green.
He was hired under the previous
director, and I have kept him. It is hard
to measure his value to us
because he focuses on Brookline METCO
data.
He helps us understand what METCO is
doing, what we do well, and where we need
to improve with the schools. The next
bullet, METCO students, on
average, have a higher GPA than black and
Latinx students who live here. This is from
Green's research and his data collection
along with what was then called the
BHS data team, which I am not sure is
still called that.
[laughter] But they had a data team that
was finding that METCO students score
really well
compared to groups they are often mixed
with.
99.97%
of Brookline METCO students graduate
from BHS.
One student has not graduated since the
year 2000.
And [gasps and sighs] this means a lot.
80% attend four-year college.
This mostly comes from the Satcher report
and other sources. And
of Brookline METCO students graduate
from BHS.
We have had one student not graduate since
the turn of the century.
And [gasps and sighs] so, that says a lot.
80% attend four-year college.
That mostly comes from the Satcher and
Report as well as some other things. And
We want to use Brookline METCO data to
find problems and gaps.
We talked a lot about changes because we
noticed some troubling trends.
Kids do very well in some subjects in
eighth grade.
Then in ninth grade, they do not do well.
Our goal is not to blame anyone.
We want to work together to help fix this.
We want to make the transition from eighth
to ninth grade better.
We want to see similar performance across
grades.
Next slide: Family and community
engagement.
We have a family community engagement
advisor. Her name is Vina Harvey.
Many people know her because she is very
active.
She is always organizing activities for
the community.
What people might not see is how hard she
works to build connections.
She works beyond just METCO to connect
with others.
Some events we have are roller skating and
bowling.
We had a family fun day just last
Saturday.
For adults, we have the It Takes a Village
program.
We also have our gala event.
We try to give back with the METCO
appreciation breakfast at BHS.
We present the Janet Morse Awards to
caregivers who help a lot.
We want to connect METCO with BHS and
Brookline communities.
We invite all PSB students to the roller
skating party in Dorchester.
Some come and some do not, but the
invitation is there.
It Takes a Village is a chance to meet
with the school committee and leaders.
It helps build connections outside of
schools.
We also have the G. McGuire Awards to
honor PSB staff.
Now, how do we measure the METCO family
experience?
We talked about exit questionnaires. This
is new this spring.
I want to mention that I do not have
results yet.
This is because the students have not
graduated.
I want parents and kids to share freely.
The feedback goes to Lauren Green, not to
me.
I told parents, "Feel free to share your
thoughts, even if they are critiques."
This way, they do not worry about what
they say.
mostly cuz they grads haven't graduated,
but also I wanted parents and kids to say
what they wanted to say.
And it doesn't come to me. It goes to
Lauren Green.
And part of the reason for that is that I
And I told parents was like, "I want
you to feel free to say If you have to
critique me, let's do it."
You guys can Let's do it. So, that way
they're not worried about saying things
about me and it coming to me directly.
We had meetings for parents of students in
the METCO program.
We started the Brookline METCO parent
group again.
Bless you. Next slide, please.
The goal is to have the annual report by
July 31st.
This is because we need final grades.
We need time to look at those things, but
we want to.
This is what I expect to do.
We will write it clearly in the annual
report.
We want to look closer at attendance and
how it relates to student performance.
We will work with our schools to help
students with poor attendance sooner.
The idea is to work together because this
can sometimes be overlooked.
This is especially true when METCO
provides a bus.
Who is responsible for attendance? It's
all of our responsibility.
So, how do we work together on this?
We will make a plan for the METCO
transition from grade 5 to grade 6.
I talked a little about this change.
Students move from one classroom to many
classrooms and what that means.
We also want to look at the transition
from grade 2 to grade 3 based on data.
I noticed a small decline in grades in 9th
grade.
But METCO students do better as they get
through high school.
METCO students' grades in 9th grade
improve in 10th grade.
They do even better in 11th and 12th
grades.
I think one reason is that there are fewer
transitions in high school.
The schedule is the same for students.
You have the same guidance counselor.
You have the same dean.
You have the same METCO staff.
This is not the case in grades K through
8.
It changes a lot in K-8.
I know this is important for us to
address.
Our goal is to help kids and families
prepare for this.
They need to move from Google Classroom to
Canvas.
As a teacher, I know that smart students
can easily manage Canvas.
I have talked with parents about how
students say they turned in work, but...
I need to find out how to help with that.
We need to look at grades 5 and 6 and
grades 2 and 3.
The last thing I mentioned is the balanced
calendar with schools.
This helps our kids and families have
better resources.
with the schools so our kids and families
can have the riches of
everything. Uh next slide.
So, Meco Meco 60, we’re going to focus on
60 years of success, teamwork, and
tradition that has made thousands of
diamonds.
Please think about writing.
We are doing a summer writing project.
We want community members to join.
Also, in September,
buy some Meco 60 merchandise.
This money will help with Meco 60, but
many people see items
around town like, “Oh, how do I get a Meco
sweatshirt?” That is one way.
Or come to at least one event. Full
calendars will be shared on August 1st.
Please help us get September 8th
recognized as Meco Day. I have talked with town officials.
We will try to get it approved at Town
Meeting (the town's legislature — elected members who vote on budgets and laws) in the fall.
We believe it is important for the town
after 60 years.
Every September 8th is Meco Day.
I don’t know what that means beyond saying
that.
But sometimes you just need a stamp for
history.
Because there will be a child long after
we are gone asking, “What’s Meco 60?
What’s that? Meco Day?” Yes, that is the
first day the writers arrived in 1966. Here is that story.
And please support us in hiring a
filmmaker and a historian to tell Brookline Meco's story.
I think that is very important. I feel
that when I hear a lot of
information, it seems jumbled
or confusing to me,
it’s because Meco has been very good at
supporting
and protecting our students and families.
As a former history teacher, I don't think
we have done well at explaining
what Meco is and showing it clearly.
We need to have documents in every library
to explain what it is. This is what we are
planning to do.
We talked about the writing, that’s one
thing, but we want a documentary
that can be online for every teacher to
access, along with having a historian write something.
All right.
And so, final thoughts. Um you know, I
think
to say what it is. And so, this is stuff
we're really
thinking of doing. You know, we talked
about the writing, that's going to be
one thing, but we really want something
that's documentary
that can be online somewhere and every
teacher can pull it up, as well as uh
having a historian write something.
All right.
And so, final thoughts. Um you know, I
think
METCO provides Brookline a chance to work
together for our
commitment to METCO. Um
and it is an opportunity that we
have to take. I think it's a chance for
Brookline to stand out from other
districts for inclusion and excellence in
our commitment to METCO.
There are 33 METCO districts linked to
Boston. There are another six linked to Springfield.
When you ask, most are jealous of
Brookline.
There's a reason for that. A lot goes into
it. I think we have a
chance to show our greatness.
There's a chance to be leaders in Boston
METCO and suburban Brookline
partnerships. Some people are here today
because we have good
relationships. So, with Baffin and
Brookline, METCO Cares has been a great one. About 10%
of our students are identified as Asian
American, Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islander. Um, so, working with
Baffin has been a great relationship.
We have a good relationship with Temple
Ohabei Shalom. Um in particular
they provided after school care for us. We
still have kids who go there for after
school care. We couldn't actually pay for
it anymore. It wasn't making sense
financially. Um but kids, especially from
Ridley
and Lawrence, still go. They also
hosted our first queer kids of color unity
conference.
And all that comes from a lot of
work with us. I was
lucky enough to speak at Temple Ohabei
Shalom for their 180th
anniversary in my first year as METCO
director to talk about black and Jewish
relations. So, I think that's a beautiful
relationship we have.
Um Brookline METCO and our culture
connected to Juneteenth and other things
is very strong for us. Um and Brookline METCO and Brookline Muslim
friends is something that we are
developing.
Um and we have worked hard to really build
But again, the chance to be leaders
and be a shining example
for other districts.
And lastly, um we want to create an alumni
network for Brookline METCO.
Somebody I went to school with, Laura
Nelson,
is an amazing political strategist. I
say amazing because she led the campaigns
for Elizabeth Warren, Ed Markey,
and Ayanna Pressley. She's a Brookline
METCO graduate.
is an incredible political strategist. I
say incredible like led the campaigns for
Elizabeth Warren, Ed Markey,
Ayanna Pressley. She's a Brookline METCO
grad.
The current uh I'm going to forget the
name. [clears throat]
Uh is for community engagement for Mayor
Wu is a Brookline METCO graduate.
And we have many more. I can share the
exciting stories like
a guy named Jay Pope who makes music for
Dr. Dre and others.
I mean it for real. We have a big network,
so I need your
help. I know many people who have been
around for a long time, but I don't know
everyone and I don’t have all the
resources. So,
we have the chance to build a real alumni
network that is big. And
again, it will make us all look good.
All right. I think that's my last real
slide, Betsy.
I think. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Tito Jackson has that. He ran for mayor.
Tito Jackson is great. He ran for mayor
and city council.
Um, yeah. I would say he is an
entrepreneur now.
Absolutely. [laughter] It is hard to bring
him to school for what
he is doing in his business, but yes.
Right. What he is doing is fine. I don’t
have a problem with it, but
probably not for middle school.
Okay. Bella, do you want to say something?
Sure. Thank you. Thank you, Malcolm.
Um, I have had the chance to either live
or
work for seven different METCO school
districts out of the 33, and I would say
that Brookline has always been the best.
Um, some years ago I met Malcolm for the
first time when you might have just
started. We were in Roxbury.
I remember meeting you, and um, I have
worked with a few different METCO
directors and I thought then, oh,
Brookline has a good one.
[laughter] Um
the one thing Malcolm
mentioned is when the office of
when the Office of Equity and Excellence
was eliminated.
Um, many may not remember that METCO was
part of the Office of Equity and
Excellence. So, when the Office of Equity and Excellence was
eliminated, that was a big change
and it took some adjustment. I think
Malcolm
talks about that somewhat and the
change and regaining your footing.
Um
It has not just been 60 years; it is
something bigger.
There is a special history. There is a
special history.
of the METCO program in Brookline that
I think is different from other
school districts. What I hear Malcolm
saying
I would support is to build on that
difference
and in
in leading and guiding. Other
METCO programs have not had the support
that Brookline has had in its
staff or in its leadership. While
Malcolm is in his fourth year, he knows
the Brookline Public Schools well.
or Brookline Public Schools. So it all
it matters.
There is a lot of chance to grow here, and
we
could improve to be the best.
I got to be part of
the end-of-year celebrations,
not just for the students, but also for
the community events.
The big party and the small parties.
There were many events, and that Vina
Harvey
Vina Harvey has made them happen.
I have been in many school districts where
they try to hold events, but
people do not come. People don’t feel
they are part of a community. Here,
it is important. People come out and enjoy
each other.
There is a wonderful culture. I have never
seen anything like this
in other districts. It is very strong
here. As I said, one reason Brookline is
special is
its location. We are surrounded by Boston,
so we benefit from
its energy and diversity, but we
are a suburb and have resources.
This gives us a rich environment and I
think the METCO program shows that.
that urban energy and diversity, but we
all are definitely a suburb and and we
are resourced. And so we end up with a
really enriched environment and I think
the METCO METCO program reflects that as
well.
Um but there is a lot I feel like.
You have stabilized where, you know,
without having the Office of Education
(OE). And um also
you have completed your
fourth year. And while you have been part
of Brookline, it is just a different part
of being able to
expand and be that leader. So, I think
there is a lot to
be proud of, proud of our METCO
(Metropolitan Council for Educational Opportunity) director, part of our program.
And um just, you know, we stand on the
shoulders of those who were before us and
I feel that what we see in Brookline
is very much that. So, thank you.
Thank you. Carolyn.
Thanks.
Thank you. That was great.
So, I have paid attention to things for a
long time and this is my
the end of my second year on the School
Committee (the elected board that runs the public schools). And I think this is the first
chance that I have had to hear all of
this and I was just really focused and
um um there is so much that you just told
us
that I did not know. Yeah.
That I did not know. And I also just feel
like my understanding just went
up. Yeah. And I really was and so thank
you.
Um I still might have a couple technical
questions which do not have to be
tonight. They could be another time.
But right off the bat I was really struck
when you talked
about
someone being there for them. And I wrote
that
down. And then you talked about riders.
Mhm. And I felt
um more understanding. Yeah.
of what it might be like
to be a METCO student. And of course
we hope we are providing benefits.
Um But I think I felt the vulnerability
Mhm. that I imagine must be there for
children, little kids
Yeah. getting on a bus. Yeah.
So I am also really interested in your
aspiration.
I want to make a history and film. Has
there
been
a film or larger history about METCO
(Metropolitan Council for Educational Opportunity) generally?
Yes, there are actually a few
documentaries made. The current CEO
was shadowed by an Emerson College student
for her master's thesis. So
we have a copy of that called "Far From
Home"
about Candace Sumner, who is now the CEO
for METCO.
It is about 40 minutes long. We used to
show it in Race Reel. It has been a
while since I connected with Race Reel, so
I don’t remember exactly.
But there are other films too. One came
out during COVID.
I remember the Boston Globe did a movie.
They made a big piece.
They also created a film because people
could stream it, and it was a series,
which included a movie about METCO. There
are also some
books, and some books are somewhat
related, I guess.
Some books about Boston busing often
mention METCO.
Right. But I don’t know of anything that
is specific to Brookline METCO.
Yes. When I became the high school
coordinator, one of my first questions
was, "Do we have a list of who was the
first graduate?"
They said, "No." I asked,
"Do you have anything? I will go research
and find it." Not really.
I knew 75 kids were part of it, and there
are some records in the Brookline room
that are helpful but not exact.
As part of their history, METCO
Incorporated worked hard to record how they started METCO Inc.
They saved all the state papers and other
documents, which are in the archive at Northeastern University.
But it is not focused on people’s stories.
I would love to have that information.
That is why we tried to build an alumni
network. We have identified
some alumni. Unfortunately, this past
month we learned one of the original writers
passed away. Most of them are older now.
But to show you how important this is, one
woman who graduated in 1969,
the first large class, was Teresa Bowling
from the famous
Bowling family. She graduated in 1968, 2
months after Martin Luther King Jr. died.
She is the only junior we admitted in that first group.
Um but yeah, they and so they hear but
but to show you how powerful it is, one of
the women who graduated in 1969,
which is the first large class, we did
find out Teresa Bowling of the famous
Bowling family. She graduated in 1968 2
months after MLK died. She's the only um
junior we took in in that first group in
Um, one woman who graduated in 1969
said, "Malcolm, I want to help some
Brookline seniors."
She gave a thousand dollars for two
scholarships for our kids.
She just did it. She only asked for our
tax-exempt status to file her work.
But other than that, we got a check.
It has been great to build relationships.
We still have a long way to go.
Many people stay in touch with us.
Mhm. Mhm.
Can I ask one quick question?
I want to mention the American Experience
documentary
called the Bussing Battleground about
METCO.
It was made by a local documentary
filmmaker, Sharon Greenberg.
I appreciate that. Thanks. Sorry.
Um, do
all of our METCO students start in
kindergarten?
Or are there times when a student joins in
a different grade?
Most of our students start in
kindergarten.
This year we had a smaller class due to
space.
We have 20 kids.
We have around 20 kindergartners coming
in.
What makes it tricky is that intake for
METCO
is more of a puzzle than a lottery.
We had a few families with older siblings.
We don’t promise them a spot, but we say,
"We think we can help."
I work with enrollment and ask, "Do we
have space for this kindergartner or second grader?"
We try to keep them young to keep them in
school.
Sometimes we have unusual cases.
For example, a kid is in private school,
then their sibling gets into METCO.
Later, they say, "We like Brookline better
than private school. Do you have space?"
They have sibling preference, so they jump
the lottery,
but it's still based on space.
I can’t just place any kid; there has to
be room.
It gets tricky because we want to keep
families together.
If the school has no space,
it can be hard, but yes, most are in
kindergarten.
It’s mostly kindergarten.
Thanks. Yeah. I don't know.
Okay. Should I say hello to people or not?
Bob should say hello. I’m sorry.
Sorry, I didn't know if I should say hello
to people who raise their hand or if you should.
It's my job to do that. Are you joking?
Go ahead. You can do it. I don’t need more
work.
[laughter] Thank you so much, Malcolm. I
wanted to ask something similar.
I have met a lot of students not in
Brookline who are in the METCO program in other school districts.
They have moved between school districts.
I wonder if we keep track of data on
students who leave Brookline for other METCO districts.
Yes.
That is actually very hard to do.
METCO Incorporated does not allow that
because it would be like shopping.
Unfortunately, Brookline gets most of the
shopping.
We are full, but we get most of the
I had a parent from Newton who came to me
and said, "We live in Eastie.
Brookline is closer. Can we go to
Brookline?" I had to say no.
They cannot because they already belong to
a METCO district.
I want to explain this.
In METCO's history, some kids have moved
from one district to another.
The last group in charge stopped that.
I worry that this creates issues for kids
with problems in the district.
I understand why because everyone would
try to swap and move around.
It is very hard for METCO Incorporated to
manage that, but I would not manage it.
I get calls like, "My child is in Weston,
the trip is too hard. Can I come to Brookline?"
I am more worried that kids are leaving
Brookline because of this.
Well, they cannot leave. They cannot go to
another METCO district.
We do keep track of the graduation rate.
There is also a number of kids who leave.
I would say most of them leave because as
kids get older, they want to play sports.
I think that has been the main reason I
have seen in my four years.
But again, we likely lose four to seven
kids each year and many
Well, they don't leave. They can't go to
another Meiko district. We do have
So, you know, we do the graduation rate
and there's a rate of attrition. I would
say the greater pool has been um
as kids get older, athletics in certain
schools in certain sports.
Mhm. I think that's been the thing I have
seen the most in my four years. Um
but uh you know, again, we probably lose
four to seven kids a year and a lot of
Brookline is moving for different reasons.
Families move out of Boston to live in
suburban areas.
Sometimes, families move to a completely
different state.
For example, we had a family we loved who
is moving to Rhode Island next year.
You need to be a Boston resident to be
part of METCO.
But I would say we don’t lose very many
students.
Most of our kids stay, and you can hear
them talk about it.
Some families have been part of METCO for
generations.
Some of you met those parents before.
I guess I should feel proud, but it's
harder to accept as I get older.
I have taught METCO kids, their parents,
and now their kids.
[laughter] I’ll say, "I think I went to
school with your mom."
They keep coming back, so we don’t lose
many kids that way.
That’s great to hear!
I have two more questions.
Can you talk about reducing racial
isolation?
This was also in your annual report.
When you mention reducing racial
isolation, what does that mean?
Okay, I will explain your goal.
It has two parts, and it is also METCO's
vision.
We try to place more than one child in
kindergarten, not just one.
Each school is different.
Some schools have more racial diversity
than others.
No matter the school, we try to place at
least one other METCO kid.
This helps them understand the journey to
get there together.
Whether parents drive them or they take a
bus, it matters.
I think about that when we place kids in
schools.
It’s important to mention that racial
isolation means we want to increase diversity.
Kids in towns that are less diverse should
not only be surrounded by whiteness.
Bringing kids from METCO gives them
experiences they might not have otherwise.
For example, State Representative Chris
Rowell shares his story.
He talks about his time at Lincoln-
Sudbury.
Now that he is in politics, his wrestling
co-captain is now the mayor of Lynn.
They support each other, and this is a
result of METCO.
they didn't have METCO. Um in particular
uh State Rep uh Chris Rowell talks
Rowell's talks a lot of um Rowell, sorry,
talks a lot about his experience
at Lincoln-Sudbury. And now that he's in
politics, but his
wrestling co-captain is now the mayor of
Lynn.
And they boost each other up, and that's a
result of that METCO racial about like
If the kids didn’t wrestle together and
weren’t in the same grade,
they would not have had that relationship.
It works in two ways. I want to say that
the Department of Elementary and Secondary Education made a visit to us
this fall. They met with my staff, then
they
met with
Superintendent Wong, me, and Dr.
Pernoit. We almost got into an argument.
They
said, "I don't believe your kids feel
comfortable here."
I said, "I don’t know what to tell you."
[laughter]
We did not get that report back.
Then they met with the kids. They met with
kids from the middle school and high
school.
I followed up afterward and they said
they really do feel comfortable here.
I agreed. It’s not perfect. It’s not all
of
them. They had a small group to talk to.
But in general, they do. We have many
METCO
kids who practically live in Brookline.
They spend all their time here. I see them
at Pino's at 10:00. Like,
I ask, "What are you doing?" They say, "I
was at a friend’s house. We did
homework, played video games, and now I’m
catching the T, but I’m grabbing
a slice from Pino's on my way home."
We have others who just come for school,
then go back to
their homes and work. There are many kids
in between. Whether it’s music, drama, sports,
debate, the Cypress, we try to get all
our METCO kids involved in everything.
Most have real connections through
something here.
Usually, it’s more than just a friend.
It’s with their family.
There are connections and other things
too.
Thank you. My last question was about
special education and
what challenges and chances you see.
I think a few things. It’s important to
talk about special education and look at
some of those data
points to make sure we see METCO
separately from saying,
"This many black kids are in the program."
Second, it’s important to note that
we have been through a really tough time
these
well, this many black kids are getting in
and think that's METCO empirically.
Um I think two, it's really important to
note that um
you know, we've lived in a really tough
time these
The last few years have been hard in many
ways. I'm not talking about politics.
I'm talking about emotional issues since
the pandemic.
I think often,
even good people who want to help and know
a lot,
search for ways to help kids succeed.
When we think about METCO kids in special
education,
we are trying to help them do well.
Schools care about them. Teachers care
about them. Their parents
care about them. The METCO advisors care
about them. So,
we look for answers, and one answer is
special education. Um I
don’t want to talk about all the details.
Most of this is well-meaning and
really trying to help. Sometimes, that
eagerness
seems to show up in places like the
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education (DESI)
and other areas.
That’s a bit out of our control, but
it shows a strong effort to help.
What we found in the last few years is,
kids are acting in unusual ways.
I was telling someone at the high school,
you won’t see a ninth grader act the same
for a while.
One had COVID in third grade, another in
sixth grade, and so on.
Our seniors who just graduated missed half
of seventh grade
and all of eighth grade in school.
That changes how a kid comes to ninth
grade now.
As we look for solutions,
we must keep working hard to get better.
There was a big meeting here to discuss
multi-tiered systems of support, and those
interventions.
These systems are helpful and will support
our METCO kids.
Everyone is doing a great job to help our
METCO kids.
Bella. So, I think Malcolm is sharing our
findings about disproportionality.
To be eligible for Individualized
Education Program (IEP) services,
a student must have a learning
disability. Statistically,
not all of our students who are Black and
And to understand for a student to be
eligible for IEP services, they need to
be they need to have a learning
disability. So, statistically
um not our students that are black and
Students who are Black and Latino are
being picked for Individualized Education Programs more than others.
This is not the students' fault. No.
Malcolm says people may be putting them in
these programs to get extra help.
That is why Multi-Tiered System of Support
is important.
Yes. Multi-Tiered System of Support is how
we can give strong general help to students.
We want to make sure we help all students
effectively.
Statistically, these students do not have
learning disabilities at the same rate they are being placed in Individualized Education Programs.
This shows we need to rethink how we help
them.
We want to make sure students receive the
support they need.
We feel positive about the direction we
are taking.
Um, yes, that's correct.
I wanted to talk more about a recent
visit.
The new associate commissioner of the
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education is Darlene Fernandez.
She wanted to visit every METCO program.
Yes, every single one. By the time she
reached us, she was more than halfway through.
She seemed a bit tired and disappointed.
But then she met everyone.
Mhm. She even apologized. She said, "You
know what?
It really is different here. Students talk
differently about how they feel included."
Yes. This is an important thing to note.
Yes, Sarah.
I want to praise you for the annual report
and for tonight's meeting about METCO so we can learn more.
I am looking at page 11 about this year's
goals.
I think these goals are very smart.
We know that attendance plays a big role
in student success.
Yes. I want to point out one of the goals.
My question is for Bella, or I have a
request for Bella.
I don't always know when MEChA is included
in discussions and when they are not.
It seems like they are involved in Multi-
Tiered System of Support meetings and other discussions.
I would like you to help us understand how
MEChA is being supported.
As you give us updates on attendance and
the strategic plan for equity,
please explain how you support MEChA.
Bella or a request is more for Bella. Is
that I don't know that I always know when
MEChA doesn't go it alone and when
they're in they're included in
conversations and it sounds like they
are, that they're there for MTSS
conversations and other conversations.
So, I would just love that, you know, as
you update us as as we look at the
strategic strategic plan and equity,
when you update us on efforts for
attendance that you help us understand
how we're supporting how you're supporting
MEChA cuz I think that that
This will help us build on what we learned
tonight.
We received information in the strategic
plan and the annual report.
Thank you.
Suzanne, thank you. Malcolm, thank you for
your hard work.
Your work is very important. I am a bit
worried.
Since we do not have the Office of
Educational Equity right now,
this work may fall on you.
I worry that you have a full-time job
already as the MEChA director.
I wonder if you could talk about how you
see this going forward.
Is this happening?
Are people reaching out to you because we
lack an Office of Equity?
How do you see this moving ahead?
Yes, I worry about this too.
I have only been in this position with an
Office of Equity this year.
In the past, some MEChA directors took on
this work.
Not all of them did.
In different districts, you hear that they
become the office of equity.
I love doing this work, but it is very
hard.
We need to figure out what this looks like
now
since that office is gone.
Who is responsible for it?
What are the responsibilities?
Is it professional development?
Is it tracking incidents?
What exactly is it?
This was also hard because
we had trouble defining what that office
meant to the town.
Bella, thank you. I didn’t mean to put you
on the spot.
It’s fine. I’ve been here a long time.
I’ve seen many things.
Malcolm, Dr. De Lucca was very involved
in providing professional development to
the town,
but I can’t say that is true for everyone.
with. And so um it was just hard to
establish what
that office actually meant to the town.
Bella. Thank you. I just want to say I
didn't mean to put you on the spot. I just
No, it's fine. I've been here for a long
time and like you know, I've seen
So Malcolm Like Dr. De Lucca was very very
involved
in providing professional development
other things to the town, but I wouldn't
say that's true for everyone.
I'm sharing my goals tonight.
One goal is to set up an equity leadership
team.
We also want to create a strategic equity
plan.
This is required by the state government.
I believe Malcolm will be a strong
partner.
But it's not fair to expect one person to
do it.
I look forward to working together.
Collaboration is important to me.
I don’t believe in doing everything alone.
I want to work together more.
Yes, you will be a key partner.
Hello, Malcolm. Hello, Bob.
Does anyone else want to speak?
You shared some data tonight.
You said that one student has not
graduated from Brookline in 25 years.
That is an interesting piece of data.
You also mentioned that 80% of students go
to college.
Yes. What happens to the other 20%?
It does not mean they do not have a plan.
It really depends on the student.
One of our toughest cases was a student
who graduated last year.
Ali White Bomb talked about a program
called OFC.
Now, most people know this program as ACE.
It is a different program now.
We had a student who we kept track of
closely.
We had his schedule on the wall in the
MECO space.
He would come in and ask, "Is this where I
need to be?"
I would say, "Yes, go to class."
He was interested in agriculture and other
areas.
Now he is doing urban farming in Boston
and doing well.
We helped him, working with both MECO and
ACE.
To use your words, Bob, we try to make
sure students have a good path.
wall in the MECO space. And he would come
down there and like,
"Oh, this is where I'm supposed to be?"
And I'd be like, "Yeah, go. Get to class."
He was into uh all kinds of things with
agriculture and other stuff. Now doing
urban farming in Boston and doing great.
And we hooked him up with that, not just
with with MECO, but that was in
collaboration with ACE. So, I you know,
to use your terminology, Bob, we try to
make sure kids have a dignified step.
Um, that can mean a lot of things for
different kids. A student I
remember well is Dallas Jeter. He
struggled in high school. He went to the
military, came back, and used the GI Bill.
Now, he is working on a master's at
Suffolk University. He left Brookline High
with pride.
That is what we can do. We have a saying:
you graduate from Brookline
High, but you're MECO for life.
Kids come back and say, "Oh, Mr. Corthorn,
I got into the party life at
college. I need help. I need to transfer."
We try to help them settle in
so they can return and make their parents
happier.
Sometimes, they are 18, and other times,
they are 22. They say, "I am still figuring it out."
We have to think about the 80% and the
20%.
Absolutely. Final question: You have a
strong staff.
Yes, the MECO (Metco) staff. When I worked
in Brookline, we did not have that many.
When you look at achievement data, have
you thought about different ways
to divide the staff's work in the schools
to focus on academics?
That is what I mean.
When you say different staff in the
schools, could you clarify?
The MECO (Metco) advisors. Sure. This is
the first year we have an advisor at every school.
This was requested by the principals. We
must look at this closely and see what we can do.
Having an advisor in every school has
helped with attendance issues.
Some kids only wanted to see the MECO
advisor. If the advisor was not there,
it was hard to get those kids back on
track.
I wish I could show you my text messages
from last year to this year.
The number of principals texting me in an
emergency has gone down a lot.
Okay.
first year we've been able to have an
advisor at every school.
Um and um again, that was something asked
by the principals. So, we're we're
really going to have to look at that and
see what we can do. I think what it has
mitigated that I can say with a lot of
confidence
is having an advisor in every school has
so many that attendance issue
where where there were kids floating
around in particular, we had kids at
some schools who only wanted to see the
Meco advisor. Well, if the Meco advisor
wasn't there because they were at their
other school,
it was hard to get that kid regulated
and get back in.
Um and so, it has I
I I wish I could show you my text chain
from last year to this year.
[laughter] The amount of principals who
are texting
me on a regular basis like in emergency
mode and I have to drive to that school
has shrunk immensely. Okay.
But I don't think it's my job. I think
it's the people who are there.
So, I think that is some easy information
I can gather.
We will need to look at the information we
have.
We will see what that means.
I think it has helped me evaluate things.
You see, having a person means spending
money.
That is money that could go to other
things.
I think one complicated thing in our
system is...
Please remember, I love our system.
I believe in Kindergarten through 8th
grade.
That is why I moved back to put my
children in Kindergarten through 8th.
I think middle school is hard for kids
going through changes.
Putting those kids in one place needs some
rethinking.
What we discovered is that...
Now we have real contacts that mean
something.
So, our advisors at those schools know 20
to 30 parents.
They can say, "Hey, you know, Malcolm
hasn't done his history homework."
They can help him during win block.
They say, "Yeah, Dr. Myers will help you
this day because you haven't done your homework."
You see, it is our first year.
I need to plan how to build, strengthen
and evaluate things.
Yeah, I think that's something we need to
keep doing.
Also, academically, we are still doing
pretty well.
I showed a picture of a girl who graduated
from Brown University.
We have two kids in the Posse program
right now.
This year's group was challenging.
Still, 80% of our students are going to
college.
So, I think we are doing alright.
But we can always do better, and that is
clear.
Okay, so, Malcolm, thank you.
Thank you. I appreciate your work.
THANK YOU. [applause]
OKAY. Solar panel installation in school
buildings presentation.
Alexandria Vecchio will present, with a
possible vote to approve the solar panels.
Alexandria.
Thank you. Appreciate your work.
THANK YOU. [applause]
OKAY. SOLAR PANEL installation in school
buildings presentation, Alexandria
Vecchio, and a possible vote to approve
those solar panels. Alexandria.
She's on Zoom right now.
She's on Zoom. Okay, great.
Hi, good evening everyone. I am Alexandra
Vecchio. I am the Director of Sustainability and
Asset Resources for the Town of Brookline.
Thank you for your time
this evening.
Um I'm just going to pull up my slideshow
now. Give me 1 second.
Uh okay, great. Uh can everyone see my
slide that says strategic solar
initiative? Yes. Yes, we can.
Okay, wonderful. Thank you. Um as I said,
I'm Alexandra. I am the Director of
Sustainability and Asset Resources for the
town. Um our Deputy Director Shelley
Dean couldn't be here this evening. She
has been working a lot on
this and I think she has talked to some of
you before this
meeting. Um I appreciate everyone’s time
leading up to this meeting on
this topic. So this evening, um I want to
focus
specifically on the school projects
because that is what is most interesting
to you. First, I will give a little
background and context
because I think that is important to
understand
what this is about and a bit of the
context around
what we are doing here.
In Brookline, we have many municipal solar
projects
that are currently in operation and under
construction. Right now we have two
town-owned systems that are quite small
and a bit older on the library and the
health building. Then we
have one town-owned system that is under
construction, close to completion at
the Driscoll School. I am very excited
about that. I was here with all of you
last year, or maybe it was 2024. But
on the Driscoll solar project. We also
have five different solar systems that
we developed as power purchase agreements.
This means that
we have rented our rooftop to a solar
developer. This way, we get a
reduction on our energy bills, but we
don't get all the savings from
that system. So, right now we have some
proposed projects that are coming up. One
is at Pierce School and then four other
sites in town for near-term construction
that are town-owned. We
are also looking at some medium and long-
term projects and expect town
ownership for those, but we will need to
check the finances as we move forward.
This is all coming from a solar financial
working group that
was formed over the past year. It included
members of the Select Board (the town's
elected executive board), the Zero Mission Advisory Board, and the Expenditures
and Revenues Study Committee, Commissioner
of Public Works, and me.
Commissioner Shute, and I were looking for
ways to grow solar power in
town and help save on energy costs.
This will help us use energy independently
and lower
electricity bills for everyone in town and
at schools.
Because of a federal tax credit that is
available but will expire
soon, we were looking at how to use those
savings quickly and also create
a long-term money plan.
We need to work with our building projects
while doing this.
We will not put solar panels on roofs that
will be fixed or renovated
in the next 5 years. That would not be
smart.
Solar panels last over 20 years.
They often last about 25 years.
We want to avoid installing something we
will have to remove later.
We must think about this in relation to
our building upgrades.
The solar financial working group
suggested that
the first step is to use the federal
investment tax credit.
You will hear me call it the ITC tonight.
This tax credit is running out, and we
want to use it
for the Driscoll project.
We are working to use it in the next few
weeks.
For a project to get this credit,
you can receive up to 40% or usually
around 30% of costs back.
You must start construction before July
4th of
this year, which is just a few weeks away.
Then, you have four years to finish it.
You can also start working on it in 2026
or 2027 and complete it by
December 31st, 2027. That is a short time.
Driscoll project. And and now
we are trying to capture here in the
next few weeks actually. So for a project
to qualify
receive
up to 40% but typically around 30% of a
return on the project. You have to
commence construction before July 4th of
this year. So a few weeks from now and
then you have four years to place that
into service
or you can place it into service anytime
in 26 or 27 and start construction
within there and then complete it by the
December 31st 2027. That's a short time
When we say "frame especially when placed
into service," we mean it needs to connect with the utility Eversource.
Everyone is trying to meet this deadline.
They want to get 30 to 40% back on their
projects.
We want to give ourselves more time to
start building by July 4th.
Starting construction does not mean we
need solar panels on the roofs yet.
It means we need to pay at least 5% of the
project cost.
We also need a signed agreement to buy the
solar panels by that date.
We call this a two-track approach.
Track one is about getting the Investment
Tax Credit by July 4th.
Track two is looking at longer-term sites.
We are asking for qualifications from
solar vendors.
Responses to our request are due at the
end of August.
We want to find a vendor to look at our
remaining properties.
They will check site feasibility and
financial options.
Tonight, I will focus on track one and the
school properties.
I know those are of most interest.
This is part of a bigger plan we are
working on.
The solar projects we are exploring
include Pierce School.
They are listed in the top row.
We are also looking at Fire Station 1, the
Main Library, Heath School, and Brookline High School.
We call it Phase 2.
Brookline High School already has some
solar panels.
We will add more panels to the building.
The current ones are not owned by the
town; they are leased.
For the Pierce School project, the early
construction cost is $1.13 million.
This money will come from the Pierce.
this is a piece of a much larger puzzle
that we're working on.
So, the uh solar opportunities that we're
looking at right now, one at
Pierce School, um which you'll see in the
top row there, and then we're
looking at Fire Station 1, the Main
Library, um
Heath School, and Brookline High School.
We're referring to it as Phase 2.
Brookline High School actually already
does have solar panels on part of the
building, so we would be adding on to
that. Um the ones that are there
currently are not owned by the town, those
are uh part of a leasing
structure. Um and so, for the purposes
of the Pierce School project, uh the
preliminary construction costs we're
looking at is $1.13 million.
Um that would be coming from the Pierce
The project budget has been reviewed and
voted on by the Building Commission.
The other projects are important too.
Especially the Heath School and Brookline
High School projects.
The money for these projects will come
from a Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) item.
This item was voted on through Town
Meeting (the town's legislature — elected members who vote on budgets and laws) just last month.
The amount is $3.2 million.
This money will be used for these projects
and future solar projects too.
None of this money will come from the
schools' budget.
I will go through each project now.
The estimated cost for Brookline High
School is $688,000.
The cost for the second phase of solar at
Brookline High School is $878,000.
For context, Pierce School has a 325
kilowatt (kW) system.
Heath School has a 200 kW system.
Brookline High School has a 261 kW system.
These are all large systems.
Driscoll School has about a 200 kW system.
This is the most recent system we
installed.
For Pierce, we are holding some extra
money just in case.
This is to meet the July 4th deadline for
getting the Investment Tax Credit (ITC).
We are looking at a preliminary cost of
$1.13 million.
This includes money for roofing over the
mechanical systems for solar installation.
This will help us use the extra space on
the roof.
There is also a $50,000 contingency for
the racking system to attach solar panels to the roof.
There is an overall construction
contingency too.
This project may end up costing less than
$1.1 million.
But we will make sure we set aside enough
money.
comply with what is necessary for that
July 4th deadline to be able to capture
the ITC. And so, we are looking at
a preliminary cost of 1.13 million. That
includes an allocation
of
some contingency for both roofing over
the mechanical systems where we would
like to install solar there as well to
take advantage of the additional space
up there. And then a contingency of
50,000 for the racking system that we use
to connect the solar to the roof.
And then an overall construction
contingency. So, at the end, this
project may actually end up being less
than 1.1
million, but we are
going to make sure we put enough of a
down payment to meet that Investment Tax
Credit requirement.
In this case, the payback time for Pierce
would be less than a year.
This is after you consider state
incentives we can receive for this project.
We also consider savings from the
Investment Tax Credit.
We expect positive results from our
electric bills.
We are looking at a system that shows a
net gain in our first year,
which is very impressive.
For Hayes School, a 200 kilowatt system
has a preliminary cost of $688,000.
We expect the payback time to be just over
6 years.
Right now, we are using a 5% safety margin
because we haven’t done a final check.
If any of these systems are smaller or
cost less, the actual contracts and bills will show that.
For Hayes School, the cash flow
predictions show that once we consider
the state incentive money and after the
Investment Tax Credit return of $481,000,
after about 6 years, we expect a system
that brings in more cash than it spends,
which is great news.
We look at savings over a 20-year period.
Most systems actually last longer than 20
years.
We also plan for operation and maintenance
costs.
That is shown in the operation and
maintenance column on the screen.
The first year's operation and maintenance
costs are included in the installation contract.
Finally, for Brookline High School, as you
can see, we already have solar panels on one part of the building, so this would be adding more.
Uh so the cash flow projections for Hayes
School, um as you can see once we
take into account the state incentive
revenue as well as um after the invest-
investment tax credit uh return of
481,000,
um after about 6 years we're looking at
um a system that is uh
uh uh net flow net cash flow positive, uh
which is fantastic. Um and again, really
good numbers. We uh look at the savings
over 20-year period, but most systems
actually last last longer than that. Um
and the cost we do carry in O&M cost,
that's what that um
uh O&M column is um that you can see on
the screen. Um starting in year two, the
first year O&M is covered through the
installation contract.
And then finally, Brookline High School,
um as you can see we already have um
solar panels on one part of the building,
so this would be adding um
There are more panels in the other areas.
That would be an extra 261 kilowatts
system at a preliminary cost of 878,000 dollars.
The payback time is about 6 years.
This is a good time frame for us.
We would not have these numbers without
getting 30% back.
This refund applies to each of these
projects.
Here, you can see some savings on
electricity bills from day one.
When we include the state help and tax
credits,
we expect to have a positive cash flow in
year seven.
Today, I want to make sure you know about
this plan.
We are looking at three schools to start.
I think there will be more projects in the
coming years.
As I said, we plan to
use capital improvement funds for these
projects.
The only exception is Pierce because solar
was included in that budget.
I hope to answer your questions and
discuss the projects today.
I am looking for a vote to approve the
solar plan at Pierce, Franklin, and Hayes school.
I also need a designation of
Superintendent Wong, or another person you choose,
to have the authority to sign project
contracts for the school committee.
This is because we need to move quickly
over the next few weeks to approve these
project numbers and start a contract.
We need to meet the July 4th deadline.
All of this will be reviewed and approved
by the town council's office.
I will stop sharing now and
I am happy to take any questions.
Thank you, Alexandra. Let's continue.
the solar
at Pierce, Franklin and Hayes school and
then the designation of Superintendent
Wong or whomever you see most appropriate
with the authority to sign
any project contract documents on behalf
of the school committee just because
we're going to be moving really quickly
over the next couple of weeks from
approving these final project numbers to
actually award and executing a contract
so that we can comply with that July 4th
deadline. And all of this would be
reviewed and approved by town council's
office um
Um so with that, I will uh stop sharing
and am happy to take um any question.
Thank you, Alexandra. This Let's Let's
I want to make a motion. Can I ask a
question first, Bob?
Do you want the motion first?
I'm sorry, Val. Yes. Um
Alexandra, is Select Board (the town's
elected executive board) doing all the installation? Is that the yes?
I was asking Alex if it is Select Board
for all of them?
Uh [clears throat] for these projects that
I just talked about, yes, it's
Select Board um Solar, which is the same
company we are using at Driscoll.
Um for the track two projects,
for future projects, we have put
out a Request for Qualifications (RFQ),
and so so far we have
shared that RFQ with over 30 different
companies. So, that could be anyone.
Okay. And the Operations and Maintenance
(O&M) is the same Select Board will manage the O&M for the Okay. Thanks so
much. Yes, thank you.
Okay. Let's move on. The clock is ticking.
We
have other things to do. Um will anyone
make a motion to approve the
I would like to make a motion that we
approve. Sorry.
You already Let's make a motion so we can
talk.
Let's make the motion first.
I will read the motion that I wrote when I
met with Shelley, who works for
Alexandra on this project a week ago.
Go. I move that the School Committee (the
elected board that runs the public schools) approve the installation of solar energy
infrastructure at Heath School, Brookline
High School, and Pierce School
and allow the School Committee Chair to
sign along with the
Select Board Chair on the contracts that
Town Council approved with the solar
developer for each school project.
Is there a second? Sure, I will second.
Suzanne seconds. Okay. Any comments?
I will just say that I met with Shelley
Ryan, who is
the deputy under Alexandra on this
project. She shared all the
information with me. It makes a lot of
sense. And from the
financing and capital side, we did not
bring this up because it wasn't
mentioned to us at a meeting we could
schedule. Because the
July 4th deadline is 2 weeks from Saturday
and all this work must
be done, and it is not taking money from
the school budget.
It is being funded in other ways. It makes
sense to go solar, so I
spoke independently
to support this project. And that is where
the motion came from.
Okay, so we have a vote, a motion, and a
second.
Okay so we have a vote we have a motion we
have a second.
Will I be around? Like when?
Before, yes. Sure. Yes.
Okay, let's take a vote, Val.
Yes. Faiza. Suzanne. Yes.
Donna. Yes. Jesse. Yes. Carolyn.
Yes. Sarah. Yes. Rob. Yes.
Unanimous. Thank you, Alexandra.
Thank you, Alexandra. [clears throat]
Thank you all for your time and support.
I appreciate it. Have a good evening.
Okay, question. Do we move to the next
agenda item or take public comment (time when any resident can speak) at this point?
Let's go [clears throat] public comment
(time when any resident can speak). Who's next? I don't have the list. Here we go.
We have Rosen.
Rosen Valchev. [clears throat] Oh great.
Thank you for waiting.
Hope you're eating a lot of the food.
Thanks. All right, well I'm here to give a
public comment (time when any resident can speak) about the section reductions too.
I think they raised a number of issues. I
want to speak about equity and fiscal responsibility.
First, I want to say that I think the
superintendent is being very careful noting that we have low kindergarten enrollment in the district.
It probably makes sense to move resources
to other important areas, maybe health, maybe the materials and fees program.
But I wonder why we are cutting one
kindergarten section at Hiram School and not at the school with low enrollment.
We have seen these numbers. Reducing at
the high enrollment school of FRR means class sizes go to 19 or 20, while some other class sizes are around 12.
Oh, I see now. By cutting at the high
enrollment school, we get class sizes of 19 or 20, while other schools have class sizes of 12. That is a 50% difference.
If that was the only choice to cut, then
that makes sense. But there are other choices to cut at schools with low enrollment.
In those cases, we can have balanced class
sizes of 15 or 16 throughout the board.
So, I'm confused why we chose the
unbalanced option. Choosing the unbalanced option brings up two things at least.
One is equity, and many people already
spoke about equity, so I don't want to repeat it, but it is important.
I also want to point out that FRR is a
Title 1 school, and it is losing not just the kindergarten section, but also the...
school of FRR means the class sizes go
to 19, 20, while some other class sizes
are around the 12.
Oh, I see. Now now I see it. So, anyways,
by cutting at the high
enrollment school, we have class sizes 19,
20, while other schools have class
sizes of 12. That's a 50% difference.
Now, if that was the only option to cut,
then that makes perfect sense, but there's
other options to cut other places with low
enrollment schools, and in those
options, we get balanced class sizes of 15
or 16 throughout throughout the
board. So, I'm puzzled why we're going
with the unbalanced option, and going
with the unbalanced option means two
things at least. One is equity, and a
number of people already spoke about
equity. So, I don't want to repeat it,
but I think it's an important point. I do
want to point out also that FRR is a
Title 1 school, and it's losing not only
the kindergarten section, but also the
third grade section. There are questions
about why the Title 1 school is getting many cuts.
This is about fairness. Many people have
told the committee about this.
Now, I want to talk about spending money
wisely. I have not heard much about this.
It makes sense to cut resources in grades
with few students. We can move resources elsewhere.
But I do not understand why we cannot do
this in a fair way. Some places have more students coming in.
As we heard from the guidance counselor,
many kids enroll in the summer, especially at FRR.
If we start FRR in early summer with 19 or
20 students, the number may go above 22.
I have heard that 22 is a big number to
watch for.
If FRR does go above 22, then the district
might have to move a kindergarten class back to FRR.
What does this mean? It means we may not
save the money we wanted to save.
So, the smart choice is to start everyone
at 15 or 16 students.
This way, we do not worry about not having
enough students.
It is unlikely we will need to bring a
kindergarten class back anywhere.
Also, we can save some resources for other
important things.
In the end, I think having an unbalanced
plan seems to follow some reasons.
I do not know what those reasons are, but
I want to let the community know.
There are also fairness and spending
issues to think about. Thank you.
Mike Lyons. Thank you, Mike Lyons.
Hi. My name is Mike Lyons. I have one
student at FRR in first grade.
I have another starting kindergarten this
fall.
I have two points I want to convince you
of tonight, along with what others have said.
First, I want to check class sizes based
on what each student goes through.
We should not just look at comparing
schools to each other.
Second, I want to see the registration
data before making cuts.
This data should include past information
and data for each year moving forward.
It should be shared like we already show
attendance data for students starting in September.
If you could, please look at slide one. I
will move through these quickly because I have 3 minutes.
Hi. My name is Mike Lyons. I have one FRR
student in the first grade. I have
another starting in kindergarten this
fall.
There's two points I'm hoping to convince
you of tonight in addition to
what other folks have said.
First, that I would like to um
evaluate class sizes by what each student
experiences.
Not just looking at, you know, a
zero-sum school versus school
um thing. Second, I'm hoping we can
publish registration data before making
cuts, both historical and each year going
forward, the same way we already publish
the attendance data of the students who
actually start in September.
So, if you wouldn't mind looking at slide
one, I'm going to roll through
these pretty quick cuz I have 3 minutes.
There is school-by-school registration
information from the last meeting. I know it has changed a little.
I looked at it again. I calculated it on
my computer. I can show you later.
The trends are still the same. It is
uneven. If cuts are needed, as others have said, there are better ways to do it.
If you go to slide two, I know I said I do
not want it to be school against school.
This chart shows what each new
kindergarten student goes through.
There are 380 bars. Each bar represents
one student. The height of each bar shows the class size that student faces.
Cutting one section of FRR creates many
different class sizes across the district.
It also affects a lot of students. You can
see that big bar at the end, which is for FRR.
That bar is wide because FRR has the most
kindergarten classes of any school.
You would expect the average class size
and the average size that students experience to be the same.
Those are the two different lines you see
there.
But you will notice there is a gap between
those lines.
The gap is because so many FRR students
will have larger classes than other students in the district.
Closing that gap would make the experience
for all students more equal and fair.
This would be true no matter what school
each child goes to.
Given the questions about late arrivals, I
also made two models.
One with steady attendance and another if
the trends from the last three years continue.
If you look at slide eight, with steady
attendance, which may or may not happen, the actual numbers this year are mostly even.
However, cutting one section creates a
bigger gap than before.
FRR students end up being very different
and above the 22 students per class guideline.
If you look at slide 11, instead of flat
attendance, it asks what if we follow the trends of the last few years.
You will see that FRR attendance grows
slightly to 23.5 students per class, but
larger class than the other students in
the district.
So, closing that gap, I think would make
the experience across the district far
more even, fair, and equitable
regardless of what school each child
attends.
Um but given the questions about late
arrivals,
I I also modeled two scenarios.
Uh flat attendance and if the past 3 years
trends continue.
Uh so, if you look at slide eight, uh with
flat attendance,
which may or may not happen, um the year's
actual numbers are pretty
even. This year's numbers, but cutting one
section creates a bigger gap than
before.
So, FRR students become big outliers and
above the 22 student per class guidance.
If you look at slide 11, instead of saying
flat attendance, it
says what if we follow the trends that
have happened over the past few years.
You'll notice FRR attendance grows
slightly and climbs to 23.5 students per
class, but
If you cut any part of any school,
you cannot have fewer than 22 students.
My point is not about cutting this school
or that one. My point is that
without information on
how student registrations
lead to real attendance,
it is very hard to guess who will be here
in September.
My second point is that sharing this
information,
which I think the school district already
has,
would help everyone understand when to
argue about cuts
and when not to argue.
In closing, I hope we consider how this
affects students
and also publish the registration data
along with the attendance data. Thank you.
Thank you, Mike.
[applause] Next, we have Irit.
She is on Zoom. Irit Moore.
Yes, can you hear me? Yes, we can.
Okay, perfect.
Good evening, everyone. My name is Irit
Moore.
I am a parent at FRR. My oldest daughter
is in FRR now,
and my youngest son will start
kindergarten next year.
I know it's been a long meeting. I also
know our community
has already sent many emails with
questions about cutting
one kindergarten class.
Earlier tonight, you heard the numbers.
You heard from Jordana about what this
looks like in real life,
who the children are, what happens in
summer, and what it means to
make this cut now and then possibly
need to add more classes later.
I don't want to say all of that again.
Instead, I want to share what a parent
thinks.
Three years ago, my older daughter started
kindergarten at FRR
shortly after we moved here from Israel.
Um who the children are, what happens over
the summer, and what it means to
make this cut now, and then potentially
need to rebuild capacity later.
I don't want to repeat all of that.
Instead, I want to add the perspective of
a parent.
Three years ago, my older daughter entered
kindergarten at FRR shortly
after we moved here from Israel.
She arrived with no English at all.
For some children, starting kindergarten
is easy. For others, it's
much harder. For children who are new to
the
language, new to this country, or just
quiet and unsure, it can be a big change.
I saw how important it is for
a child to be seen, not just taught.
I saw how much it matters when a teacher
has time to notice the
quiet child,
to understand who needs help,
to build trust, and to make a classroom
where children feel safe to try,
to speak, to make mistakes, and to grow.
That does not happen by chance. It happens
because we have
great teachers and administrators.
But even great teachers need the
right conditions to do their job well.
Smaller and balanced classrooms,
real support, and enough ability to meet
the children where they
are. Now, 3 years later, I'm getting ready
to send my younger kid
to kindergarten. Last week, we had a peek
and practice
where new kindergarteners came to visit
the school.
For some, it was their first time walking
into
this building. I took a moment to watch
the children.
Some were excited, some were ready for the
next step, but some were nervous. Some
looked
very scared. It makes sense. FRR is a
very big school and building,
especially compared to the small
preschool they are coming from.
At the end of the day, these are tiny
5-year-old kids.
It's our job to make sure
their first time in public
school is strong, supportive, and
positive.
I know the district has tough choices to
make,
but I trust the creativity and
leadership of the administration to find
supportive, and positive as it can be.
I understand that the district has
difficult choices to make,
but I trust the creativity and the
leadership of the administration to find
we discuss other solutions if we need to
make cuts, not
by taking resources away from our youngest
learners at the start
of their school journey.
I want to look at my son the night before
his first day of kindergarten,
hug him tight, and confidently tell him he
will have a
wonderful school experience
because we chose the best place for him.
And because the adults in charge of that
place made the right choice for
him and his classmates.
So, I'm asking you, please keep the fifth
kindergarten section at FRR.
Thank you. Toda, Elit. Um
Chichi Wu. Uh, she has withdrawn.
Withdrawn. Uh, Deborah Brown.
I did.
No? Uh, Zariana?
Thanks for being patient.
Um, hi everyone. My name is Zariana
Katicich and Jones and Malcolm Cawthorne
asked me to speak tonight for METCO and to
support METCO.
Over the last several months, I have heard
more talk about the
cost of the METCO program here in
Brookline. While I understand that
budgets are important, I think we are
asking the wrong question. The question should
not be how much METCO costs. The question
should be what is the value of
the community we are building together.
As someone who grew up in Brookline, I can
tell you that racial
diversity is not just an idea. It is not
just a number in a report. It is a
difference between children growing up
alone and children growing up
learning from each other.
It is a difference between a school system
that only talks about inclusion
and one that actually practices it.
For decades, METCO has brought students
and families to Brookline who have
enriched our schools, challenged us to
think more broadly, and helped create
the diverse learning environment that many
people in this town say they value.
As a Brookline student of color, I know
how important it was to learn alongside
students from different backgrounds and
experiences. METCO did not only benefit
the students in the program. It benefited
all of us.
This is why I find some of the recent
public talks about METCO
very concerning. At a time when diversity,
equity, and inclusion
efforts are facing attacks across the
country, including from the Trump
administration, Brookline keeps saying
that these values are important
to us. Yet, many members of our community
have seen that as
Some programs focused on diversity have
received a lot of criticism.
This includes the decision to cut the
Office of Educational Equity.
People are also talking about programs
like METCO.
Some actions make it seem like diversity
efforts are not important.
Many black and brown families feel this
way.
Before I finish, I want to mention an
email from Sarah.
She said that tonight's presentation is
about celebrating METCO.
I agree that we should honor METCO and not
argue about its budget.
Malcolm Cawthorn, along with students,
families, and staff, deserve recognition.
But I think we need to address why people
are speaking up now.
Celebrating METCO and ensuring it
continues are both important goals.
These goals go together.
Our community should know that METCO
should not be cut during tough financial times.
If we value what METCO brings to
Brookline, we must support it all the time.
This includes during celebrations and when
making financial decisions.
METCO is more than just a budget item.
It shows who we are as a community.
It shows our commitment to educational
chances for all.
It also shows that our children learn
better when they are together.
So tonight, I celebrate METCO.
I celebrate its students, families, staff,
and its positive effects.
I ask everyone to keep supporting and
investing in this program.
It has made Brookline a better, more
diverse, and caring place for years.
Also, a reminder that tomorrow is
Juneteenth.
Please come out to celebrate at Cypress
Field at the high school.
Thank you very much. Enjoy your night.
Thank you, Zarianna. [applause]
Angela Peoples.
Hello, everyone. My name is Angela
Peoples.
I have children in Brookline schools, and
I am here as an active parent.
I care about all children.
I think the school district, especially
Ms. Bellawan, the superintendent, should pay attention to our community and schools.
I have children attending the Brookline
schools, and I'm here
basically because um
I'm an involved parent for one.
And I care about all children.
I think that your school district,
especially Ms. Bellawan, the
superintendent, you need to really pay
attention to what's going on in the
community as well as your schools. Um
There are problems happening to the
children.
My children are kids of color, so I am
very worried.
My child has been threatened.
My child has been called a racial slur.
And nothing has been done.
Everything went quiet.
No one was talking to me. I couldn't even
get a report of what happened.
Okay?
I am very, very upset.
I am beyond angry at this point.
It is sad that I have to come here like
this.
I am not here to celebrate or be happy.
I am here because my child is affected,
and that affects me too.
I cannot sleep.
Okay? He is not sleeping.
I am almost 60 years old, and my menstrual
cycle started again because of the stress.
I am not ashamed to say it. I was enjoying
menopause.
About student rules, the child who
bothered my child
harassed him, calling him a racial slur,
and said he would bring a gun to school,
and I couldn't even get a report.
Okay? It is so bad that
the other student tried to pay another
student to hurt my child.
So, while you are here celebrating,
my child's education is being hurt, and so
is my life.
I am involved and need help.
I want to help other parents and people,
but right now I need help.
I am also worried about other children
involved.
Several children are affected.
The minds of our children are being hurt,
and if you think what is happening to me
does not concern you,
you are wrong because it does affect you
too.
What affects someone's feelings and social
life
that um I am concerned for the other child
and
the other There were several children
involved.
Um so, the mind of our children is being
affected and if you think what's happening
to me is not you you you're
not bothered, guess what? You are bothered
by this because at the same
time when you're home resting, what
affects someone's social and emotional
can it it's traveling into the schools.
And you may not see us on the news like
things happening in Boston, Brookline,
and things like that, but you got to
understand this is where it starts. So,
something's being given birth to the
child that has harassed my child to feel
the way that he's feels. So, I also
have prayed for that child and his family
and I feel bad about it.
And that's why I'm here tonight to tell
you guys that um that's very important,
the social and emotional aspect of
dealing with children. And um it cannot be
ignored.
If you don't deal with these things today,
you will deal with them in the
future. The Bible even says that words are
life
and death. And so, the way that we talk
to each other is very important. If I
encourage you today, I'm giving life to
you. If I insult you, I'm making you
feel bad, but a lot of people, you know,
my children can be resilient, but this
really affected my child and I want to
say I'm here to stand for my child and
speak for my child. And that we as a
community and also a committee and all
of that, we have to work at what our
children are saying. Hear your child,
listen to your child, believe your child,
and take time to be with them during the
day. And then
you'll know what's going on. And I want to
say I'm very upset that I emailed
you, Superintendent Bellwong, and I got no
response. So now I see how it goes.
I wasn't getting a response from the
school, and I didn't get a response from
you. Somebody will be speaking to me.
Thank you. Thank you, Angela.
Germaine.
Hello, my name is Oh. Hello, my name is
Germaine
Hello, my name is Germaine Northcross.
I'm not as polished as everyone else that
came in here. Um
I'm a mom
of 10 children.
And what opened me up to come here is
because my daughter, Ivory White, she
graduated from
Brookline High.
So now her two baby brothers go to the
Brookline High, and I still didn't get any
reports about my son being
harassed. One guy followed my son in the
hallway and said, "What are you doing?"
And he said,
"Doing? You live in Brookline. What do you
need
to do anything? You have a mother, father,
a house, and
a car. And you live in Brookline, and you
go to one of the best
schools with a swimming pool, pottery,
jewelry making, wrestling, and
more. I just want to say united we stand
and
divided we fall.
What is America made of?
My daughter is now 33 years old. She
graduated from Salem State. She went to the
Juniper program, thanks to the Medco
program,
thanks to Jean Maguire, who gave her a
chance.
She is my second child. I gave birth to
her.
The placenta broke in five different
places. I almost died, but she
became a journalist. She is a mom.
My first child, Ashley, she went to Stitch
it.
Again, Brookline,
Medco first gave me a chance and gave my
family a chance to come here and see
the diversity. I have never lived next to
anyone other than
someone who looks like me. I mean, I
now love diversity. I said, "This is why I
named all my kids colors."
I just
had enough of this. Enough of this racism,
sexism, or any other issues. I just want
to
move on. I want to work together as a
community and as
human beings. I haven't taught
my kids racism. They haven't learned that
at home, but they learned that
in school. They learned that
outside in the streets. In fact,
all my kids hang out with people from all
nationalities around the world, and I
don't have a problem with that. Just
what is the color of love?
You know? Like I said, united we stand,
divided we fall. What are we standing
for? What are we standing for?
Thank you. Thank you for your time.
Thank you, Jermaine.
So, that concludes public comment (time
when any resident can speak).
We're moving on to the next topic, which
is
superintendent evaluation for the school
years 2026-2027.
And Donna will introduce this topic.
What's my name? Oh, gosh.
Thanks. Before we start, I want to give an
overview of where we are
in the superintendent evaluation process.
Tonight's discussion will
be step two
in a five-step process.
The discussion is to review
the superintendent's proposed goals for
the 2026-2027 evaluation cycle.
We did not do an evaluation with
Superintendent Wong last year because
she was an interim. The goal is to give
feedback and decide if the proposed goals
match the committee's priorities, the
district's needs, our
strategic objectives, and expectations
for the coming year.
When I looked at the materials about the
superintendent evaluation, I
thought of a few guiding principles
that helped me, and I would ask you to
consider them too.
We should focus on outcomes not the
details of how things are done,
ask clarifying questions before suggesting
changes,
avoid focusing on how things are done,
focus on a few priorities that will make
the biggest
impact, and of course, we want to
respect different opinions. I think
as we start the process,
Bella will share her
proposed goals, and then we will have
a chance to discuss them, ask
clarifying questions, and then we will
as we embark on the process, um
Sorry. I just got I'm so tired, so I just
got lost. I think as we as we as we
get started, um Bella will share her
proposed goals, and then um we'll have a
chance um to discuss them, ask
clarifying questions, and then um
I will summarize what we agreed on and
changes.
Then we can talk about what to do next and
maybe vote.
Great. I think Valerie, when she was
chair, sent a memo to the School Committee (the elected board that runs the public schools).
That memo outlined the process we can use
through the Department of Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE).
I have never used this format, but I'm
willing to try.
The DESE format starts with a self-
assessment.
I created a document for this.
I will not review that document in this
meeting.
It reflects the end-of-year report and our
progress with the current strategic plan for 2024-2027.
It highlights areas that might need
support.
One thing to note is that last year we
focused on our financial systems.
This year, I have changed my focus to
other goals.
The DESE model says we need one goal for
student learning, one goal for professional practice, and two to four goals for district improvement.
I have chosen four goals.
For each goal, we will indicate the focus
indicators.
Valerie shared with you a document with
all the indicators.
They are noted by Roman numeral and
section, so you can refer back to them.
I am proposing a student learning goal.
You should choose things that are specific
and measurable.
The student learning goal is to decrease
disproportionate outcomes for
whereas coming into this year, our large
focus was looking at our financial
systems, you'll see that I have shifted
to other goals. Um, the DESE model says
that there must be one student learning
goal,
one professional practice goal, and two
to four district improvement goals, and
I've chosen four. All right. And then,
when Pardon?
I don't know. Just
So, um, and then for each goal selected,
um, just to indicate where the focus
indicators are.
What, um, Valerie shared with you was a
document
with all the indicators, and so they're
just noted by
Roman numeral and section here, so you
can refer back to them.
Um so, for I'm proposing for the student
learning goal, and again, you're
supposed to pick things that are smart
goals, so sort of a distinct product or
outcome. So, the student learning goal
is to to decrease disproportionately for
Students in the Public Schools of Boston
will no longer be identified by Designated ELL Services Identifiers.
The school district has been found twice
in the last three years to have too many students of color in certain special education programs.
This will be the goal for student
learning.
The goal for teacher practice is to
evaluate 100% of all Unit A
and Unit B teachers, plus other
administrators.
This will help keep high-quality teaching.
The
other part is to set up a way to evaluate
teaching assistants.
Right now, there is no evaluation document
for teaching assistants. So, the
goal is to create this, and it is being
discussed now.
The strategic plan that runs till 2027 has
goals for
getting evaluations done for
75%, 90%, and 100%. I will focus on the
100% goal.
This includes Unit A, Unit B, and other
administrators.
The district improvement goals
show some of the work we have agreed to as
part of our Memorandums of Understanding,
and it also makes sense for our district
to improve.
The first goal is to review grade levels
to improve scheduling and
fairness among staff in K-8 schools. So,
that is one goal.
The second goal is to create an
equity leadership team and make a plan for
fairness as required by the
state. So, when I give the
superintendent's report update, I will
also talk about the updated standards
that were sent by the Commissioner of
Education last week, which is a priority.
We do not have
an equity leadership team or a plan. That
is the
specific result we aim for with that goal.
For the third district improvement goal, I
have marked it as "To Be Determined."
We just had a curriculum review by the
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education, but we don't have
that were communicated by the Commissioner
of Education last week, and
this is one of the priorities they
identified. We don't have
an equity leadership team, and we don't
have an equity plan. So, that would be
the specific outcome of that goal.
Um you'll note for district improvement
goal three, I've listed it as a TBD. We
just underwent a district curriculum
assessment by DESE, but we don't have
the report is not here yet. We're supposed
to get
the report at the end of this month, so I
put it as a
place to hold it until it arrives. It will
have a place in
our goals for the coming year. So, again,
this report hasn't come
yet. It's supposed to come this month.
And so, this is a to be determined, and I
hope you will
allow that flexibility since it is not
clear right now, but we
can look at the report when it comes, and
then we can agree on what that priority
will be. The fourth district improvement
goal,
we have done a lot with our financial
systems.
A lot has been done on student services.
And I know Robin will have goals about
Office of Teaching and Learning. I know
that Office of Administration and Finance will have goals
about Human Resources. These other areas
are
noted as weaknesses when I review the
strategic plan and what we have done
so far. So, it is actually a very
complete plan with many parts,
but it will include evaluating procedures
related to using facilities. So, one of the things in
the Memorandum of Understanding is to
consider how we use facilities,
maintenance, and repairs. It has been
clear to me, and Jesse is not in the
room, but in our meetings with the capital
advisory group, this has been
something they have mentioned. So, I am
pointing it out as something for this
category. Work order systems were started
this
year, but they still need follow through
to ensure they are well
established. We have begun work. Thank you
to
Joe Albuquerque on our emergency
response systems, but they still need
further
improvement. They have been started, but
they need a lot of support. I want
to focus on security and safety
for our schools. This is more about
physical safety. We have done a
lot of work on mental, social, emotional
safety. So, this will be to
make a distinction from that, physical
security and safety.
And we have worked a lot on transportation
practices, but I just
lot of work on mental, social, emotional
safety. So, this would be um to to to
distinguish from that, physical physical
security and safety.
And we've done a lot of work on
transportation practices, but I just
I took the whole scoring guide from
DESCI. This is a scoring guide from DESCI,
and I used it all.
So, there is one goal for student
learning,
one goal for professional practice,
two to four goals for improving the
district,
and I chose four, including one that is
Continuous Professional Development (CPD).
Comments. Donna.
Can I start with a question to clarify?
For the professional practice goal,
the evaluation system for
paraprofessionals,
is that
Can we focus on that goal if it is related
to
negotiations, right?
Or not?
So, to explain,
I believe we can have one. We just need to
agree on the paper.
Oh, okay. I think at this point both the
B U and the district administration
school community support
are working on an evaluation document.
So, we are just figuring out what that
document will look like.
In other words, there will be a document
for the next school year
no matter what happens in negotiations.
I don’t know because we have to agree.
This would be the goal, and if
we can't make it happen, then we can't
make it happen. But I
think it is important because I want to
focus on the evaluation of AB and the
administrators who are not aligned,
and I wanted to add that as
part of that. Carolyn?
Thanks. This is great, Bella. Thanks. I
have a
question about
I really like the student learning
goal. I am very interested in our
disproportionality report
and how that will be handled and
I look forward to learning more about it.
I guess you clearly know what you are
doing with this.
Is your goal to no longer be
in the identification?
in the identification
um realm and I don't remember what the
rule was or where we were what the
number was in next school year? Like given
that
Individualized Education Programs (IEPs)
go with students, I would think that
that's something that like how long will
like we can't just remove IEPs from
students, right? So,
um I mean, I'm very interested and
supportive of work being done here.
But, I'm just curious like
how much can we Is it really
realistic for us to no longer be in the
identification um
I don't know what It may mean um
Honestly, I have picked goals that may not
be achievable by the end of the year.
Okay. I'm just going to have to say I
didn't meet the goal. Okay.
But, I um but I'm saying But, that you're
working naming it Okay, awesome.
Okay. I That's great. I um I didn't name
goals that I knew were
going to be easy to reach. Okay,
fantastic. That really answers my
question. Thank you. That's great.
Sarah. Bella, I wonder if in
um the third goal
for district improvement you might want
to be careful not to promise yourself
for something that you're not sure how
it's going to turn out. I wonder if you
already know in terms of curriculum
what you would like to
see us work on.
And if that report does not match what
you're interested in, do you want to leave yourself a little
bit more room there? Because you could
rewrite it to
be um to improve you know
district curriculum
without having it be um tied to the
report.
Or do you have a lot of confidence that
the report's going to show
what you believe to be true by the system.
I I
I have no idea what that report will say
because
the Department of Elementary and Secondary
Education (DESE) is starting these curriculum reviews and that it's fairly they did
them before. This is sort of a new
round. I don't know what that report will
look like.
I am open to what they might say, but I
can't imagine there isn't something useful in the report for us.
I feel that way, too. I think we need to
work on our curriculum in the community.
I just didn't know if you wanted to point
it out yourself and take action instead of waiting for the report.
So, it could be...
The Department of Elementary and Secondary
Education model suggests two to four district improvement goals.
It might pick one that will be identified.
Even though it mentions curriculum, the
assessment was more than just about curriculum.
I would not be surprised if they don't
mention the evaluations that are being done.
Okay.
Vicer.
Yes, thank you. I also had a similar
question.
I feel that leaving it open-ended may lead
to more concerns.
If they find many concerns...
Oh, okay. I am not agreeing to address
everything.
Okay.
So, do you want to guess how many
concerns? Two concerns or one concern?
No, because I don't...
Some of the concerns...
If not, I may think it means to address
all concerns.
You know, someone can read it that way.
So, I don't know. Do you...
Yeah.
So, another thing about setting goals is
that if I expect it is work we need to do anyway,
I think it should be called a goal.
My understanding is that there will be a
report that highlights areas we need to improve.
Yeah.
It will point out areas that are strong
for us in relation to those standards.
some address all concerns. You know,
someone can read it as that.
So, I just can I I don't know. Do you
Yeah. So, it's the other thing about
creating
goals is um if I anticipate it's work that
has to be done anyway,
then I think it might as well be
identified as a goal.
So, my my understanding is that there'll
be a report and it's going to highlight
areas that we need to work on.
Yeah. So, it will it will highlight
areas that were strong areas of strength
for us um relative to those um standards
It will show us where we can grow as a
school district.
We need to think about this.
It is up to us to decide how to focus on
these areas.
Superintendent Wong said there are some
known areas where we need to improve.
We know we need to work on certain things.
These are listed in our strategic plan and
in our team discussions.
But, we do not have the report yet.
We can address any issues that the
district curriculum assessment report finds.
Does that sound okay?
I am open to suggestions on how to say
that.
I was also thinking about it.
As Robin mentioned,
we could talk about important concerns.
This would help clarify which issues we
are prioritizing.
You will then address these issues.
That is just a suggestion.
Okay.
What about saying to address key areas of
concern?
Who decides these priorities? Is it by the
District Evaluation System (DES)? Or by us?
It can be decided by you.
Yes, okay.
So, we will address concerns from the
district curriculum assessment report.
These will be prioritized by you.
It could also be set by the senior
leadership team or by the superintendent.
I agree with that.
I think Donna should decide the
priorities.
[laughter]
I wrote that Betsy will decide the
priorities with the senior leadership team.
Okay.
Susan, I am excited that we have improved
our finances.
Now many of your focus areas are in
instructional leadership.
I think this will be very exciting for
you.
I hope it will be.
I believe it is a good place to put a lot
of your energy.
So, I am looking forward to that.
Under professional practice,
you are not doing all the evaluations
yourself; this is being done by others.
energy. So, I'm excited about that. Uh
under professional practice,
uh you aren't actually doing 100% of the
evaluations, you're having that happen.
So, please think about that a little.
Um.
If it's not fully done,
it’s not your fault. It’s because the
people in charge
did not get it done.
I am just trying to help you with that.
Um, you might want to say something about
giving the evaluators the tools they need
or that they should talk to you.
Or, you can keep it the same, but just
think about it.
I will be surprised if we meet that goal,
but I think we can do better if I name it.
Um, so we should try to be there.
Also, about the indicators,
I have to pick one from one, two, three,
and four.
Right. So I will make sure to do that.
And for number four,
it is about cultural proficiency.
Right. Yes, yes.
Faisal. The other thing is,
it may be under
OTL, which means Office of Teaching and
Learning.
We need to look
at the new Department of Elementary and
Secondary Education suggested requirements for high school graduation.
That might be Robin's job.
We need to start looking at this coming
year.
It is important because next year,
it will start to be required, I believe.
I will talk about that in my report.
Okay, great. Thank you.
Faisal. Yes. In professional practice at
the school,
it mentions that unaligned administrators
should
help keep high quality instruction.
How do we define high quality instruction?
It is defined in the rubrics.
Okay. Got it.
Maybe that’s why their indicators are
listed.
Yeah. Yes. Okay.
Just as far as how it is defined.
Yeah, I mean just as far as it's defined
Somewhere because people may find
different ways to define high quality
teaching if it's not there. So, thank you.
I think we are getting close,
but we can change this in the fall if we
want, right?
We can vote yes and then
No, you can't because we will start using
it as
a plan for the summer. I mean, you can,
but that would not be
very helpful.
Okay. Anything else?
Oh. Sarah.
Just one more thing,
and I can accept that you
are willing to write goals that might not
be possible
within a year, but just one more thing for
the second one about
the professional practice goal. Is there
any chance that you want to say
work towards 100% instead of saying
achieve?
Okay. Work toward?
I think that the idea of a smart
goal is that it needs to be
something that can be measured and is
possible.
Sorry. I'm sorry. Go ahead.
But sorry, I’m sorry.
Okay. Um, sorry, I had a question about
your microphone.
Oh, thank you.
District improvement goal two: establish
an equity leadership team and create a
strategic equity plan as
required by the state. So, I think I have
two questions.
Is this about
educational equity?
And then you mentioned
there are new rules from the state.
So, I am curious what those are.
A new rule? Oh, okay.
It's not a new rule. The district has not
followed
the elimination of the Office of
Educational Equity.
Because there is not a team.
Right. And there is no equity officer.
And because of money issues, we didn’t
create the position. So, the current
leadership team will have to take on that role.
Mhm. Also, you must choose something from
1, 2, 3, and 4.
Yep. So, 4 is cultural. Yes.
This fits well.
The commissioner mentioned this as
important for next year.
Okay. I guess my first point still stands.
Is this about educational equity?
What does this involve?
What does an educational or equity
leadership team mean?
Do we mean educational equity?
Using the language from the law, it is
educational equity.
What does this mean?
It is not about social equity; it is only
educational equity.
I do not know how else to explain it.
It is educational equity.
What does the equity leadership team need
to do?
Can you explain more? The equity
leadership team must create the strategic equity plan and how it will be carried out.
An equity officer could do this, or it
could be the leadership team.
Okay. I think what Carolyn means is that
we need to be clear about what these terms really mean.
So, what does an equity goal mean? What
does an equity team mean?
I think that is not clear.
Actually, as defined by the state?
Yes, that is known language.
It is their requirement.
Do we have an equity plan from past years?
We do not have one.
Okay, I understand.
We did not leave one.
Did they create one?
No, not that I can find.
Okay, thank you.
So, this is currently being worked on.
As the clock reaches 10:10,
[snorts]
Do we have a a equity plan from previous
prior years?
We do not. We do not. Okay, thank
We did not leave one. Okay.
Had they developed one? No.
Not that I could find. Okay, thanks.
Okay, so this is in process.
As the clock reaches 10:10,
Can we decide on the goals and vote on
them? What do you think?
Yes, is there a formal suggestion? I
suggest we move the goals.
Is there a second to that suggestion? I
think there were two wording changes.
Right?
Yes. Okay, so is there a second to that
suggestion, Donna?
I will second. Suzanne? I will second.
Okay, any discussion? Faiza?
Yes. Suzanne? Yes. Donna?
Yes. Val? Who is the last one?
I don't know.
Val, did you vote? Superintendent goals?
Carolyn? Yes. Sarah? Yes.
Rob? Yes. Okay, it passes without
opposition. Thank you very much.
[clears throat] Now we have the
superintendent's report.
Yes, I will try to be quick or just speak
directly.
Anyway, the first item is that the
commissioner held a meeting online for all superintendents last Friday.
After a year of having meetings that were
more about listening,
he shared many things about what is
expected this coming year.
I was surprised, and I have not talked
with other superintendents since that meeting to see how they received the news.
One important item is the expected launch
of the new graduation requirements.
These are just suggestions and will be
shared with the Board of Education.
If the Board of Education approves them,
they will become the new graduation requirements.
In Brookline, we are close to meeting them
in some areas,
but other areas will need some time to
meet the new requirements.
First, everyone will have to meet the
Massachusetts Core requirements.
You all just approved graduation
competencies, right?
Yes, you voted on that before the last
meeting.
requirements. And so they are
recommended and [clears throat]
they um they'll be presented to the
Board of Education. And if the Board of
Education approves them, then they will
become the new graduation requirements.
Where where Brookline is we're close,
but we're close in some areas, but other
areas would require some investment in
time. The first is that everyone would
have to
meet the MassCore requirements. And so
you all just approved graduation
um was it competencies?
Yeah, so you voted them before the close
Last year, they match the MassCore
requirements.
However, math needs to improve from two
classes to three.
Or it could go from three to four classes.
Three classes to four classes.
Yes, I apologize. It is three to four
classes.
It would change to three to four classes.
Otherwise, they are similar.
The surprise is these changes start for
the grade nine class.
Not this fall, but next fall.
The commissioner said if you do not have
everything ready, you can still get it ready by graduation.
Many school districts may have trouble
with that.
The slides for the webinar were supposed
to be shared later.
I planned to share them with the School
Leadership Team and the principals.
But the slides have not been posted yet.
This might mean there is pushback on that
timeline.
Another part of the new graduation
requirements is a financial literacy course.
There must also be proof of career work
modeling through MyCap.
I think our school does not have that.
Another requirement is artificial
intelligence and digital literacy.
Also, schools must show that they offered
FAFSA or MASFA content and possibly met it.
There will be end-of-course exams for the
MassCore requirements.
When these exams are in place, the MCAS
will no longer be required.
Again, these changes will apply to the
grade nine class next fall.
Clearly, budgets are already set for this
fall, so it can't happen then.
However, getting everything ready for next
fall is very ambitious.
I know that MASS is working on this as
well.
Did it's the AI it's the AI and digital
literacy.
Also, um, demonstration that FAFSA or
MASFA content has been offered and maybe
met. Um
then there will be end of course exams
for the Mass Core requirements and when
those are in place the MCAS will go
away.
So, again, he said it would be in effect
for the grade nine class entering not
this fall, but next fall. Obviously,
budgets are set. It can't be for this
fall. But that that have all of that
developed for next fall is very
aggressive. Also, I know that MASS is
They are pushing back on development of
things.
Some of these things are not in the
budget.
Many of these are not budgeted for.
Right. Any one of the things they suggest
should be included.
This is in addition to the main
requirements.
They are all valid points.
But they include too many things.
Some of the requests may be more or less
important.
This could cause some pushback from the
community.
He also announced changes to the timeout
spaces.
These changes will start in August.
This will surprise many districts.
We have been working on this.
We do have money set aside for timeout
spaces.
But that is not in our plans.
If Brookline is not ready for October
17th,
other communities may also not be ready.
Carolyn, can I ask a question or should I
wait?
I'm okay.
Isn't this something Senator Cream gave
us?
We made a request and want to know the
status.
We do not have any confirmation yet.
Oh, okay. So, we received that money.
Carolyn is reminding us we were offered
money.
We requested funds for timeout spaces,
ventilation for kilns, and gender neutral
bathrooms.
We are trying to get confirmation about
these funds.
Yes, I have a question.
It sounds like instead of a tough MCAS
test to graduate,
we now have graduation requirements,
coursework,
and tests at the end of courses?
It was not clear. Are they going to...
and, um, they were for timeout spaces,
they're for ventilation with the kilns,
and they were for gender neutral
bathrooms. All right, so for those three
items and we've been trying to get
confirmation and we don't have it yet.
So, I have a question. Yes.
So, it sounds [clears throat] like um,
instead of a high stakes MCAS test for
graduating high school, we now have
graduation requirements,
coursework, and exams, like standardized
exams at
the end of courses? So, it wasn't clear.
Are they going to
have standardized end-of-course tests,
because they say it is part of the
MassCore requirements, or are we making
the end-of-course tests?
Because in New York, yes, they said this.
They said the state
is going to do it. Okay, I thought so. The
state will write the tests.
Really? Tests. So, that is like New York's
Regents exams.
Grade them, and we would get results
back in a couple of weeks, is what they
said. That is what they are suggesting.
As I said, the slides somehow did not get
shared, so I do not know if
there was um I thought there was a lot in
the expectations.
He also spent some time talking about the
district diversity plan and the
equity officer team. So, he also said that
this is a priority for the
coming year. He also said that the
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE) would be
making seals of distinction for
students to earn, and that districts
would need to offer a minimum
number, to be decided, of these
pathways to get these
seals of distinction. One example is the
Seal of Biliteracy, which we hope to
start,
but it seemed like there would be many
seals of distinction
yet to be explained.
All right, so that was that. He
also said that there would be a new
family portal for families to see their
students'
MCAS results.
And in the call, he said that it would
start as early as this month,
which worried many districts, because it
would be before the total data
that we usually do not get until
the fall or September.
And um it also made people say, "Okay, so
then
people will get their data and they will
want answers, and no
one will be around all summer—like who
will answer these questions
over the summer?" So just um
I think it was just yesterday, they
changed the start of the family portal
to August 14th. So they But it is still
This is hard for us. Because I
August 14th,
we will not have the data yet. And um and
we are opening schools.
So
they moved it from June to mid-August,
but that is still hard for us. So Anyway,
to say that the
commissioner has um said these priorities,
but I am not
sure what the response has been. And if
the slides get posted, I will share
them with you, but they have not been
posted, which is unusual.
Because they usually post right away.
Okay. Another update I wanted to give
about San Justo play structure,
we are working and I have been talking
directly with parks. The Department of
Public Works director is away now,
people are taking their vacations and are
away.
So we will keep working, but this will not
change for this summer.
All right, but we will try to see what we
can do
in due course. All right, but we will keep
working on it, and we need to work with
other departments to achieve that.
My third update is on the FRR
classroom, where we are. We are
keeping an eye on that. The last data I
gave
you was a June 1st picture, and today I
gave you a picture for
June 16. And so, working with Megan Genny,
we
will keep watching this through
the summer.
But where the FRR kindergarten was at
19 on June 1st, they are now at
18.
So, the average is 18.3 right now.
As Jordana reported,
there have been
historically 10 to 14 Kindergarten
enrollments
over the last year and the year
So, the average is 18.3 at this time.
Um as Jordana reported,
there has been um
historically 10 to 14 K enrollments
um over the last year and the year
Before. So, even with 14,000 enrollments,
it would still keep the kindergartens
within guidance.
Many people have talked about our
the um
average class size for kindergarten at FRR
being
larger than um
the kindergarten averages at other
schools.
I have to remind everyone that when
we built the budgets,
the budgets were based on guidance.
That is our key for class sizes as we move
forward.
The kindergarten sections might be smaller
at some schools than others,
and um this is something where we
think that we have to look and
see if we need to adjust when we look at
going from kindergarten to first grade.
Um with eight kindergarten to eighth grade
schools, some with two
sections, some with five section schools,
in any kindergarten to eighth grade
school, you have a range
of two to five sections across the grade
levels. It has really um been it's
nearly impossible when you divide
the number across the schools for any
grade level that you won't have some
range.
Um we are committed to look at grade
configurations for schools um next year.
Um we were mostly looking at
the possibility of middle school models or
not. It is not a promise to use that
model. We are committed to
explore and see what that would do in
trying to even out the class sizes across
the district. The other
option looking at grade
configurations is redistricting.
So, that can also have a very disruptive
impact
on the community. So, I want to
emphasize with the K-8 schools that are
very
different in their number of sections.
different in their number of sections
For each school, when we divide, we expect
to have different class sizes.
The measure we are using is to make sure
we are following class size rules.
Right now, across all schools,
there is one grade level that is
at or slightly above the rules, but all
other classes across the district are
well below the rules for those grades.
We will keep watching this through the
summer,
but trying to balance the classes
is hard for us. And so, we
know that there is variation.
The average class sizes for kindergarten
on June 16th,
and you have to understand that a lot can
change,
but on June 16th,
the averages are 14.3, 16, 11.8, 13.3,
17.3,
18.3, and 13.3. So, there is variation.
Some of those schools with smaller average
sizes
are buffer zones, so
new families will enroll in the buffer
zone schools.
But again, we will keep an eye on this
through the summer.
Bella, can you tell the public what
guidance means?
Under guidance. So, guidance means the
School Committee
rules. And I do not have it in this
document.
But the class size rule for kindergarten
is 22. Okay?
Yes. And I checked cities like Weston,
Wellesley,
Needham, Newton, to see where we
stand. And actually, 22 is about right.
will be will be enrolled in the in the
buffer zones schools.
Um but again, we are going to be watching
this um throughout the summer.
Bella, can you explain to the public what
guidance means?
Under guidance. So, guidance is the school
committee
guidance. And I actually don't have it on
this document. Um but class size
guidance for K is 22. Okay.
Yes. And I actually looked at Weston,
Wellesley,
Needham, Newton, um just to see where we
fit. And actually 22 is pretty much Yeah.
Is
This is about sizes. Now, 22 is a
guideline.
This means that 22 is a good number.
Is this clear? It is not the maximum. But
in
Brookline, we have smaller class sizes. We
want to
improve that and meet the guideline.
I remember being at the high school in the
summer, enrollments
went up here and there. There was
always money to help with big class
sizes. You could add a class or
add a section here, add a section there.
Do we
still have that?
We budgeted for five sections.
We budgeted for five sections each year.
We used all of them this year and last
year. So, we have five sections for the
future.
We added a fifth grade section to FRR.
That section's numbers were already
slightly above the guideline. So, we added
a
fifth grade. We also reduced the
kindergarten section. So,
that stays balanced.
We added a first grade section to
Runckel because that was already above the
guideline.
So, there are four sections left. We might
add more sections as needed. But many
of those sections
are for special education
as our needs change during the year.
Sarah, when you reassign due to
buffer zones,
do you plan to change some families
who have already started at a school or
have siblings at a school?
as our needs evolve through the year.
Sarah. Um when you are reassigning due to
buffer zones,
do you intend to change some families
who have already started at a school or
have siblings at a school?
Will you use buffer zones only for
families that are new to kindergarten?
Families who are new to the district for
kindergarten.
Some families are moving into
the buffer zones or to
FRR, which stands for the school.
If they already have siblings
in the school and they might have new
kindergarten
students, they would stay at FRR.
Families that asked to move to FRR
who lived in other places
in the letters they received when
those requests were accepted
had language that said this was not
guaranteed.
Okay? There was also language saying that
if
there were other siblings who came in
and there was not enough size or capacity
in the new grade level,
they would be moved. Okay, that can
happen.
That can happen. But this is for
families that voluntarily chose to go
to FRR with that conditional
language in that agreement.
That's helpful to understand. You went a
little fast.
At one point, you said
the impact of who goes to
kindergarten now at FRR will affect
first grade later on. Can you explain that
more?
Actually, this impact is more across the
district.
As many of our speakers
pointed out, some of our kindergarten
sections are
small.
So why did we choose this? Why did
we pick FRR and not other schools? Because
some kindergartens are small at some
schools that have
historically received higher enrollment,
even more than what was described for
FRR. Okay, and so we're making
room for those. The other point is if
capacity for those. The other is um if
We have a school with two parts.
At this time, we did not eliminate a
kindergarten class.
That would have made it a one-part school.
There are situations where a school is a
full three-part school.
So, we decided not to remove the
kindergarten class from that school now.
We are looking at the future numbers for
that school.
For FRR, we had five classes, but we could
reduce it to four.
We wanted to add a fifth grade class.
This was part of our decision.
Carolyn, thank you for all this
information.
I want to confirm what you just said
because I had questions before this meeting.
I was curious about some information from
Spitz about summer and year-round enrollment.
Did you say that for FRR and other
schools, we have higher numbers than the ones reported?
You mentioned something and I thought,
"Oh, she is answering a question I have, but I missed it."
Some schools show a lot of enrollment
changes over the summer.
They usually get many new students then.
But Baker is not one of those schools.
It does not have many big changes in the
summer.
We are watching this closely.
We are trying to do our best to keep
numbers even.
We need to stay within guidance.
Following guidance is very important to
us.
I have two more quick questions.
Thank you for the update.
Right now, Pierce has 17.7 students per
class.
FRR has 18.3, but Pierce also sees a lot
of changes in enrollment.
typically has a high high change um over
the summer. High enrollment that comes in.
So So, that one um
some of our schools are not
like Baker is not one that experiences big
changes in the summer.
Yep. Right. But I I have to say that, you
know, we were monitoring and we're
trying to do the best we can trying to
even it out and also just stay within
guidance. But guidance is the most
important metric Okay.
that we are using. And I have two other
quick questions.
Um so, thank you for the update from Like
for example, right now Pierce is at 17.7.
Yep. Um and FRR is 18.3, but Pierce also
experiences a lot
um enrollment change. So,
Um, I appreciate that you gave us these.
You gave us the same numbers two weeks in
a row.
I can see that can still happen.
Yeah, of course. I just want to ask one
quick question.
So the actual numbers
at three schools decreased from June 1st
to now. Is that because
the actual numbers you are showing include
a rollover plus what we
know? And some families that were expected
to return are actually not returning?
This summer, families will disenroll
because they are moving.
Right. Yeah, that’s what is happening now.
People have said, "Oh, we are not coming
back."
Right. Okay, so our
administrative assistants at the different
schools are good at this. If they know a
family is moving, they will say, "Hey, you should disenroll."
Yeah, so they actually disenroll, but they
are still on the books.
Yes, some of the numbers went down. So for
some families, it went down.
Yeah. Sorry, I have one more clarifying
question.
Um, another thing you just said about
people can be moved if they
requested a school from outside. Do you
mean as part of a language program or
because they moved within Brookline and
wanted to stay at a school?
Or are you not talking about buffer zone
people? Sometimes they request to be at
that school, and
that happens sometimes.
But the letter they get is very
conditional.
So it is non-buffer zone people.
Um, it may be buffer zone people.
Oh, okay.
It doesn't happen very often. So, Bella,
what would So, I'm sorry, Carol.
Sorry, yeah, I don't want to put
anyone on the spot.
I was surprised by Mr. Nagano's comments
because I have never heard that from
someone.
happen that often. So, Bella, what would
So, I'm sorry, Carol.
Sorry. Yeah, I'll I don't want to put
anyone on the spot.
I was surprised by Mr. Nagano's comments
cuz I've never heard that, somebody
A child in a buffer zone can be told to
leave their school.
This means they must find a new school.
This is a usual process.
It has been done for a long time.
The letters sent about this are clear.
I will say again, I have not heard this
before.
That was a surprise to me.
Bella, I have a question for you.
What needs to happen for the fifth
kindergarten class at FRR to be back?
We need to see changes in the trends.
Okay, is there anything else I should do
with these questions?
Look to your left and see what happens.
It is midnight.
Faisa, are you included too?
No, she had Suzanne.
Okay, I just want to know.
I am still looking at the numbers.
I am wondering about Runckel and Lincoln.
Is inclusion from separate classrooms
affecting kindergarten?
All schools except Baker have special
programs.
What about Lawrence?
Does Lawrence have a special program?
I thought Lawrence did not have one.
Lawrence has an English Language Learner
program, called ELL, and Japanese.
They have ELL but not special education.
So, ELL and other programs exist.
Sorry, I just want to be clear.
When specialized support is at a school,
like special education or general education,
they need more staff.
So, any school with these programs will
have more teachers to help.
This means there are more adults for each
student.
I hope the Lawrence community does not get
upset,
but I think Lawrence should also be
considered.
Mhm. So, just so understand that any
school
that's housing that comes with a lot of
staffing to support
that. Um
so that the ratio of adult to student is
is going to reflect that.
So, I guess I I guess I would hope perhaps
now I hope the whole Lawrence
community doesn't get upset with me, but
that Lawrence might also be considered
When you come up with some final numbers
of
perhaps losing a section. I think
it is time to reduce any more sections. It
is
very disruptive to staffing because
it causes many problems.
The only thing we would consider is adding
sections if we
needed to. But right now we are not
reducing
any more sections.
However, for next year, we might reduce
grade one sections.
Yes, that’s right. But we are not reducing
any more sections now.
Can we move on to the next topic?
Is that okay, Bella? Thank you.
Yes, that is okay. This topic should not
take more than an hour.
[laughter and clears throat] Where are we?
Now, this is 8A, a possible vote to
combine the finance subcommittee and the capital projects subcommittee.
In 2005, the school committee voted to
create subcommittees, knowing they could be changed or removed.
In 2005, a finance subcommittee and a
capital projects subcommittee were created.
Do you all remember that?
Yes. Okay. 2005.
This year, 2025-2026,
we tried combining finance and capital
projects,
and the result was satisfaction with
that combination. So, tonight, I need a
motion to make the finance and capital projects one subcommittee.
Is there a motion for that? Then we can
discuss.
Donna? I would like to make that motion.
Second? I will second it.
Sarah, you seconded it? Thank you.
Any discussion about this? Carolyn?
When you say there was satisfaction, is
that
[clears throat] capital projects,
and the result was satisfaction with
that combination. And so, the motion
tonight, I need a motion tonight to
solidify the subcommittee for finance
and capital projects being one
subcommittee.
Is there a motion for that? Then we can
talk.
Donna? I'm happy to move that motion.
Second? I'll second it.
Sarah, you second it? Thank you.
Any conversation about this? Carolyn?
Um when you say there was satisfaction, is
that
That's what I read. Okay.
The report. Oh, I wish we had a report.
Sorry, I might have missed you saying that.
I read it somewhere, yes. I think it was
here. Yes, it was here.
Okay. Oh, I didn't read it. Okay.
If Betsy wrote it, I mean, I don't have
a big problem with it. Um I was on
the finance committee last year. I might
have been on the capital committee,
but I'm not sure. But I went to capital
meetings often as an advisor.
Um, I felt last year that capital
got a little neglected, like
or the meetings had to be
very long. I don't mind a very long
meeting. Um
And I don't really object to this.
But it seemed to me that
there was not much
um focus on capital. Capital is really
important, like how we
use our buildings. We are sort of talking
about
that here in a way, right? Like how do
we use our buildings for
maintenance on solar panels and
playgrounds
and all that. So um, however it works, I
would just
um say anecdotally it seemed like that.
And again, there is flexibility all the time.
Yes. The policy is to create a
subcommittee, change the subcommittee, combine
subcommittees, or eliminate subcommittees.
You can do that with a
simple vote. And I don’t object, but I
just
wanted to share my observation. Capital
got less attention. And maybe because
it was also a tough finance year, so there
was a lot
of finance work. Donna Perry?
I have a technical question. If we
if this motion is approved,
does it have to go to policy to update the
policy manual?
Okay, that was my question.
I just wanted to have some record of the
change.
Yes. Mhm. Okay. And will the policy manual
be updated so that’s removed?
I just wanted to have some record of the
change.
Yes. Mhm. Okay. And so will the policy
manual
be updated so that's removed?
Okay. Policy is okay.
Oh, that would go to Suzanne. Yes.
Okay, all in favor of Faiza.
No, wait. Who is talking?
I had a question. Oh, I'm sorry. I
apologize.
So there is a lot of work that goes into
capital.
Helen worked on it for years and did a lot
of work.
I wonder if we combine them, if there
should be someone.
Who is the leader for capital in the
finance committee?
I feel like it will get lost a little bit.
I think that is a really good idea.
I'm glad you said that because I thought
of it too.
You're saying it very well.
There is a lot of work. It is a lot of
work.
And there are a lot of meetings. Not our
meetings.
Other meetings. We had two people who knew
a lot.
Mariah and Helen are no longer here.
Right. They are both gone.
So, you make a good point, Suzanne.
I want to add that last year in finance,
Mariah was the chair of the finance
subcommittee.
Jesse led the capital work.
They used that model last year.
So, I don’t think it is a bad idea.
Is Jesse the chair of finance now?
Yes. Maybe we should table this.
Do you need Jesse here?
No. I'd rather not.
I don't mind voting on it.
The committee has the right to vote.
It’s not like we have to do it formally.
But I think Suzanne makes a good point.
We could ask Jesse to think about it.
We have four members on that committee.
Val is on that committee.
She might do some finance work.
Okay.
Or capital. A vote. Faiza.
Come back to me, please.
Suzanne. This is before me, so thank you.
Yes.
Yes. Yes, yes, no, you got it right.
If you can come back to me, I will
appreciate it. Thank you.
No, that is fine. Suzanne, would you like
to vote?
Yes, I will vote yes. Oh, good.
I just want to say that we are watching
it.
If it feels like we need more help with
funding, we
do not have to wait a whole year. We can
do something now or perhaps it is temporary.
Maybe it is for specific good
projects. Okay. Donna. Yes.
Uh Carolyn. Yes. Sarah. Yes.
Uh yes, Val is not here. Faiza.
Um yes. Yes. Okay, everyone agreed.
That's good. I just wanted to say we now
have a committee for finance
and capital projects. Okay.
Do we have any reports from the
curriculum, Carolyn?
I will do this. Um we had a meeting of the
curriculum subcommittee yesterday.
Yesterday.
Um we had two really good presentations
from our social studies
experts. We heard um
an overview and update from Greg Porter on
some money that can be available from
the state for genocide education, and
he talked about how that has been done in
the past and may be done again in the
future
if we get that
money again, but it is always interesting
to hear what is
happening in the schools. Um then Jen
Martin led a meeting um to update
us on the WISP.
WISP is being reviewed. Um and there was
more discussion about that. She showed
some data. She has been working
really hard. Some
work will be done over the summer. Um
that will respond to some community
concerns that have
been raised. Um and I thought it was a
good discussion.
I thought it was a good discussion too. I
think there was some progress.
raised. Um and I thought it was a good
conversation.
I thought it was a good conversation as
well. I think there was some movement
there. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Anything else?
No.
Finance capital projects?
Jesse. Jesse. Okay. Negotiations, me.
Okay. We are making progress in
negotiations.
We have shared proposals back and forth.
We replied to the money plan
that they presented, the Boston University
presented.
We shared our plan. We have answered many
of the
wording issues in Unit A, Unit B, and
Para.
We will meet again on the 20th. What is
today? 22nd. Monday, yes, Monday.
Monday. So, we will meet again on Monday
to see what the
union thinks of our latest proposals.
I think we all want to start the new year
with a new contract.
That is my hope.
Maybe Bob, we can just
remind everyone that they can
learn about negotiations by going to the
Public School Board website. Right? And
the School Committee website and they can
yes. Yes, they can go to the negotiations
page and watch those
meetings. I think they have been very
respectful.
And I don't think anything is very
unreasonable right now. We'll see.
Carolyn. Sorry, I forgot something in my
report.
Oh, no.
Dr. Benoit gave us a quick update on
some survey work and work that the
world language curriculum
coordinators are doing with her and the
senior leadership team to keep adjusting
since we stopped K through 5 world
language, now the high school is
starting to see kids in 6th grade who have
not learned language yet, so they are doing some work
to adjust that. Sorry, I did not mean to
leave that out. It was
actually very interesting and good to hear
about.
Thank you, Carolyn. I appreciate it.
Policy? Who is chair of policy? You are.
Suzanne. Thank you. We did meet. We had
our first
Thank you, Carolyn. Appreciate it.
Policy? Who's Who's chair policy? You are.
Suzanne. Thank you. We did meet. We had
our first
meeting with the new
committee subcommittee. Uh Sarah, Laura,
and Val and me. Um I just want to say
thank you to last year's
committee. They did a good job passing
some important rules.
Uh so thank you to them because it's hard
to get rules approved. Uh I think I saw
a list, um Bella that you shared about
four or five
important policies. I can't find it now,
but that's okay, but
I mean there was civil rights, financial
rules.
The restraint. But also the restraint,
yeah.
Um medical rules, medical delegation.
Um learning materials, yes.
Yeah, so there were quite a few.
Yeah. I think I got it. Yeah.
Okay. So anyway, I just want to say thank
you
to the team and Andy I think was the
leader. So we are going to start I’m going
to meet with Bella to see
if we will work with the Massachusetts
Association of School Committees. I don’t know. We'll see.
Um we started that work and then stopped
because of budgets, but we'll
talk about if we want to start again. And
we will focus on the
student section, the J section. And we
will each look at it before
our next meeting, and we will
also compare it to some of the other
similar districts.
Like Lexington, Newton, Wellesley.
What’s in there, Suzanne? J?
Student. Oh, that's the section, yeah.
Yeah, a lot of things.
So, I just want to say one thing, and that
is, uh, we have a very big
policy manual. It turns out, as I look at
it quickly,
that our older policies are quite short.
Our new policies are very long. So, I
don't know what that means about what
we're doing these days, but [laughter]
the older ones are just a paragraph or
two.
And some of them go back to 1978, they go
back to 1981.
Um, but our new ones are 10 pages, 12
pages.
So, we should think We as a committee have
to think You
can give me some ideas about what's going
on and
And And some of us are Some of them go
back to '78, they go back to '81.
Um, but our new ones are 10 pages, 12
pages.
So, we should need to think We We as a
committee we have to think You
can give me some input about what's going
on and
We can decide if we want to make them
shorter or not longer. This is just a thought I have. Thank you. Um, [clears throat]
I have another thought. We have many
liaisons here.
Yes. Does anyone have a report?
Don has a report. I have a report too. I
am reading for, um,
Jesse Hafter, who is the SEPAC liaison
with me.
Bob Weintraub, yes. I will take a minute
to read about the
SEPAC Hero Awards, which were given out,
um,
I think last week or earlier this week.
Last week, Friday. Last week. Each year,
the Brookline
Special Education Parent Advisory Council,
called SEPAC, Brookline
SEPAC, honors amazing individuals who have
made a big
difference in our children's lives.
These are our SEPAC heroes. They are
teachers who go above and beyond, the
paraprofessionals who give steady and
caring support, the bus drivers who greet
our children
with a smile every day, the administrators
who listen and lead with
kindness, and the Public Schools of
Brookline or out of district community
members who help every child feel seen,
supported, and
included. I think it is very special
about the SEPAC Hero Awards. Deb
Caruso, who was here earlier,
was recognized for her 31 years of
service. She mentioned that nominations
are
special because they come from families
who share how these people have changed
lives with kindness, commitment, support,
creativity, and heart. We honor and celebrate
these amazing people. They may not want
recognition, but their work
deserves it. Now, I want to read their
names and thank and
recognize our 2026 SEPAC Heroes. I might
not
pronounce some names correctly because I
am tired, but here are the names:
Roberta Arapi, Sarah Ascensio,
Lindsay Brody, Aaron Brown, Tamika
Brown, Ann Marie Carlson, Georgia
Carter, Liza Cassell, Sarah Salucci,
Garth Clingingsmith,
of these correctly cuz I'm half asleep,
but Roberta Arapi, Sarah Ascensio,
Lindsay Brody, Aaron Brown, Tamika
Brown, Ann Marie Carlson, Georgia
Carter, Liza Cassell, Sarah Salucci,
Garth Clingingsmith,
Jill David, Alex Delgado, Nancy Dillon,
Vicki Firstler, Donna Finnegan, Joel
Griffith, Aaron Hor, Aaron Horan,
Holly Irvin, Kylie Jenkins, Elsbeth
Leslie, Ben Medeiros, Gabby
Nussbaum, Joanne Pasquer, Diana
Pegwaro,
Beth Richardelli, Maya Robson, Mary
Rosini, Bernadette Rusumano,
Rosie Scott, Umi Shoolie,
Karen Shashoua, Jessie Stevens, Brit
Brit Stevens, Elizabeth Sullivan, Abby
Thompson, Haley Tyner, Fatima
Vallette, and Sophie Weinstein. So, we
thank them all.
Thank you. Is there anything else from the
liaisons?
Suzanne. I am not a true liaison, but I
was happy to attend the Vision of a Learner workshop today.
There is a lot to share about it, and I
know it is late, but I can share as we go along.
I have a couple of handouts, and it was a
good discussion.
We had a good group of people.
We had students, staff, and community
members.
Robin was there. He is leading this
effort.
We will share more news later.
Thank you, Suzanne, for doing that. I know
it took a lot of time.
I appreciate it.
Are there any other liaison reports?
Okay. Do we want to go into executive
session (a closed part of the meeting the public cannot watch), Betsy?
Oh, yes, we do. Do you want to do it?
Okay, we need a motion to meet in
executive session (a closed part of the meeting the public cannot watch)
according to Massachusetts General Laws,
chapter 30A, section 21A,
for the following purposes. Purpose three
is to discuss strategy for collective bargaining with Brookline Educators Union, Unit A, Unit B,
and the Paraprofessional Unit. An open
meeting may hurt the bargaining position of the committee, so the chair says so.
Purpose seven is to review and approve
executive session (a closed part of the meeting the public cannot watch)
minutes from the June 4th, 2026 meeting.
Do we have a motion for executive session
(a closed part of the meeting the public cannot watch)?
I move that. Second? I will second.
detrimental effect on the bargaining
position of the committee and the chair
so declares and so declares, and purpose
seven, to
review and approve executive session
minutes from the June 4th, 2026 meeting.
Do we have a motion for executive session?
move that. Second? I'll second.
Yes, Pfizer? Suzanne? Yes.
Donna? Yes. Bob, yes. Val?
Carolyn? Yes. Okay. We will not have
another open meeting.
This is the last School Committee (the
elected board that runs the public schools) meeting of the 25-26 school year.
Wow. It's been great. [laughter]
Really, a lot of fun. Bella, thank you.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. And thank you to Betsy.
It has been a pleasure. Betsy, Betsy,
Betsy, Betsy, thank you. Thank you. Robin for
all of your many contributions.
And thank you to the parents who stayed
until the very end.
Okay. Can we just do it in my office
instead of waiting
for this to close? Is that okay, Betsy?
Yes.
[music]